---
source: RevisedSTI_GoldCoin-bullion.pdf
title: Indian Standard IS 1417:2016
category: BIS Hallmarking
document_type: Hallmarking Regulation/Guideline
url: https://www.bis.gov.in
standard_code: IS 1417:2016
---

Doc: STI/1417/Mints/Refinery
 Jan. 2017

SCHEME OF TESTING AND INSPECTION FOR CERTIFICATION OF GOLD
COIN/BULLION AS PER IS 1417:2016

LABORATORY

A laboratory shall be maintained by Mints/Refinery which shall be suitably equipped and staffed to
carry out the different tests in accordance with the methods given in the Indian Standards.

TEST RECORDS

2.1
Mints/Refinery shall carry out tests on the refined gold/coins and maintain records.

2.2
Copies of any records that may be required by BIS shall be made available at any time on
request.

2.3
Quality Control - It is recommended that, as far as possible, statistical Quality Control (SQC)
methods may be used for controlling the quality of the products as envisaged in this Scheme [See IS
397(Part 1):1972, IS 397(Part2):1985 and IS 397 (Part 3):1980].

2.4
In addition, effort should be made to introduce a Quality Management system in accordance
with the Quality System Modules as per IS/ISO 9000 and as appropriate to the activities of the
Mints/Refinery

STANDARD MARK/HALL MARK

The Standard Mark also known as Hallmark under this scheme and as given in Column(1) of the First
Schedule of the licence shall be marked on each gold coin/bullion or its packing if any provided
always that the gold coin/bullion to which this mark is applied conforms to every requirement of the
specification.

3.1
Marking

3.1.1
The following information shall also be given on gold coin/bullion/packing of each coin:

a)
BIS Standard Mark;
b)
Fineness
c)
Name/identification of the Manufacturer
d)
Weight in g
e)
Customer logo as agreed between purchase and supplier(if any)
f)
Serial Number traceable back to Manufacturer's records, in case of coins serial number may
be marked on packing

3.1.2
Marking shall be legible and durable.

LEVELS OF CONTROL

4.1
The process of refining employed shall be either electrolytic refining or refining by
aqua regia process.

4.2
Control Unit - A control unit is defined as the number of gold coin/bullion manufactured
from the gold melted as a single melt in each melting furnace under similar conditions.

4.3
The analysis and tests, as indicated in Table 1 and at the levels of control specified therein,
shall be carried out on the production of gold coins/bullion which is covered by this scheme and
appropriate records and charts maintained in accordance with para 2 above.

4.4
The identity of each control unit shall be separately maintained till test results are obtained.

4.5
On the basis of tests and analysis results, the decision regarding conformity or otherwise, of a
control unit to the given requirement shall be made.

4.6
The weight of each gold coin/bullion shall be recorded and no negative tolerance shall be
permitted on the declared weight.

REJECTION

A separate record shall be maintained giving information relating to the rejection of gold coins which
do not conform to the specification. Such gold coin/bullion shall in no case be stored together with
those conforming to the declared fineness.

SAMPLES

The licensee shall supply, free of charge, the sample or samples required in accordance with the
Bureau of Indian Standard (Certification) Regulations from his premises. The remnant of tested gold
coin/bullion and the cornet left after testing shall be returned to the licensee.

REPLACEMENT

Whenever a complaint is received soon after the gold coin/bullion with the Hallmark have been
purchased, and if there is adequate evidence that the gold coin/bullion have not been misused, the
same shall be replaced free of cost by the licensee in case the complaint is proved to be genuine. The
final authority to judge conformity of the gold coin/bullion to the Indian Standard shall be with BIS.

7.1
In the event of any claim being filed by the consumer against the above Mark and not
"conforming to" the declared fineness as per the relevant Indian Standard, entire liability arising out
of such non conforming coin shall be of licensee as proved by the investigation carried out by BIS,
and BIS shall not in any way be responsible in such cases.

ALTERATIONS TO HALLMARKED ARTICLE

8.1
Alterations to hallmarked coin/bullion shall not be allowed in any form or manner.

STOP MARKING

The manufacturing of gold coin/bullion shall be stopped under intimation to BIS, if at any time, there
is some difficulty in maintaining the conformity of the gold coin/bullion to the specification or the
testing equipment goes out of order. The marking may be resumed as soon as the defects are removed
under intimation to BIS. The information regarding resumption of marking shall also be sent to BIS.

9.1
The manufacturing of gold coin/bullion shall be stopped immediately if directed to do so by
BIS for any reason. The marking may be resumed only after permission by BIS.

10.
Data on Quantity Hallmarked - The licensee shall send to BIS as per the enclosed proforma
- 1, a statement of quantity manufactured, marked and exported by him and the trade value thereof
duly authenticated by a Chartered Accountant at the end of each operative year of the licence.

PROFORMA - 1
PROFORMA FOR OBTAINING QUANTITY HALLMARKED DETAILS

(Period to be covered by the Report being …………………… to …………………………) *

Name of Licensee

CM/L No.

Name of Articles (s)

IS No.

 Grade/Type/Size

1.1 Brand/Trade/Name(s) of BIS Hallmarked gold coin/bullion:

2. Total production of the articles(s) licensed for Hallmarking:

2.1 Total production of the article(s) conforming to Indian Standard:

3. Production covered with Hallmarking and its approximate value

a) Quantity:

b) Invoice sale price:

3.1 Brand Name used on articles Hallmarked:

3.2 Calculation of marking fee on unit rate basis: Marking Fee @ Rs ____ per unit

a) Unit = 1 Article (gold coin/bullion)

b) Quantity covered with Hallmark

c) Marking fee rounded off in whole rupees as obtained by applying unit rates given in
 3(a) on quantity given in 3.2(b)

4. Quantity not covered with Hallmark. If any, and the reasons for such non-coverage

4.1 Brand Name under which non-hallmarked articles were sold

5.0 Quantity Exported with Hallmark and its value

5.1 Brand Name under which Hallmarked articles are exported

6.0 Authentication by Chartered Accountant

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*Information to be filled up by BO before forwarding to the licensee.

Note : In case a clause is not applicable, suitable remarks may be given against it.

TABLE-1
LEVELS OF CONTROL TO BE MAINTAINED BY REFINERY/MINT
AS PER IS 1417:2016

TEST DETAILS AS PER IS 1417
LEVELS OF
CONTROL

REMARKS

Clause
No.

Requirements
Test Method
(Clause/Reference)

No. of
Samples

Frequency
REMARKS

Cl 5
Fineness of Gold
of
IS
1418:2009

One
Each Control
Unit

Assaying to be done in
duplicate from the sample
Please see note 1
 Cl 4.1,
5.3,
5.4,
5.5

Fineness of gold
coin/bullion

of
IS
1418:2009

One
Each Control
Unit

Assaying to be done in
duplicate from the sample

Note 1: Sample is to be obtained using Dip sampling method as per clause 5.2 of IS 1418:2009
