---
source: Training-Strategy_14-March-2023.pdf
title: Training Strategy 14 March 2023
category: BIS Manual/Guideline
document_type: Operational Manual
url: https://www.bis.gov.in
---

TRAINING STRATEGY

OF

2023-24

1. INTRODUCTION

1.1
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), the National Standards Body (NSB) of India was
established under the BIS Act, 1986 and came into existence on 1 April 1987 assuming the
functions of the erstwhile Indian Standards Institution (ISI). The ISI came into being on 6 January
1947. Subsequently, the BIS Act, 2016 came into force on 12 October 2017 superseding BIS Act
1986 and provided for BIS to be the National Standards Body, responsible for the harmonious
development of the activities of standardization, conformity assessment and quality assurance of
goods, articles, processes, systems and services and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.

1.2
BIS through its core activities of standardization and conformity assessment, has been
benefiting the national economy by providing safe, reliable and quality goods; minimizing health
hazards to consumers; protecting the environment, promoting exports and imports substitutes;
controlling over proliferation of varieties, etc. The standards and certification schemes of BIS apart
from benefitting the consumers and industry also support various public policies especially in areas
of product safety, consumer protection, food safety, environment protection, building and
infrastructure development, etc. BIS has 5 Regional office and 38 Branch Offices spread across
India offering certification services to the industry and serve as an effective link between State
Governments, industries, technical institutions, consumer organization etc. In addition, BIS also
has a network of 8 laboratories.

1.3
Now, being the National Standards Body of India, BIS has the responsibility to lead and
co-ordinate the standardization activities in the country so as to meet the emerging standardization
needs and expectations of Indian Industry, Government and consumers. Realizing this, BIS has
brought out the Standards National Action Plan 2022-27, to outline the new priorities and the
strategic way forward in advancing the goals of national standardization in emerging areas. The
SNAP envisions to determine the strategic initiatives that BIS as the National Standards Body
needs to consider so as to:

a) Create strong and trusted eco-system for national standards development in the country that

is broad-based, inclusive, responsive and efficient in meeting the challenges posed by
economic and technological developments;
b) Support uptake of current technologies and best practices by industry and business through

standards so as to create competitive advantage, enter new markets and foster innovation;
c) Promote the key message and benefits of standards among the policy makers, industry and

public at large; and
d) Align national standardization efforts to enhance competitive position of Indian products and

services and establish a Brand India quality in global market, while addressing issues of
sustainability and climate change.

1.3
In order to achieve the targets set in SNAP 2022, it is imperative that all stakeholders
involved i.e. both external and internal not only understand their roles and expectations from them
but also have the capability and capacity to discharge their responsibilities and duties.

1.4
Further, the ever changing environment of technological advancements and the enactment
of the BIS Act 2016 has substantially changed the roles & responsibilities of BIS vis-a`- vis its
stakeholders like the Industries & their associations, Central/State Govt. Bodies & associated
Departments,
Research
&
Academic
Institutions
and
Consumers
&

Consumer
Groups/NGOs/RWAs etc. It is therefore imperative that BIS takes such initiatives that it continues
to remain relevant.

1.5
One such endeavour of BIS is to make learning one of the fundamental values of the
organization to build capability and capacity, encompassing not only its employees and personnel
working for and its behalf but also personnel from all identified stakeholders. This could be
achieved through systematic training and re-training of external and internal stakeholders through
focussed training on aspects directly related to efficient discharge of duties, workshops, on-thejob trainings, and also the general training for enabling overall personality development. In order
to achieve its overall goal of performance improvement, training has to be planned and systematic
and must lead to the enhancement of professional knowledge and skills both at individual and
collective levels. It should also equip personnel to respond appropriately to emerging challenges.
Training should also bring about appropriate changes in attitudes and should strive for that unique
synthesis between improvement of the individual's competencies and promotion of organisational
objectives. Thus, the term 'performance' is, therefore, interwoven with training.

2. OUR STAKEHOLDERS AND EXPECTATIONS OF ENGAGEMENT

2.1
External Stakeholders of BIS can be broadly classified into the following categories:

a)
Industry/Industry Associations
b) Central/State Government Ministries and Departments
c)
Academic Institutions
d) Consumers
e)
International Trainees
f)
Technical Committee Members

2.2 Industry/Industry Associations - Industry is one of the major stakeholders of BIS both for
formulation/revision of standards and implementation of standards once they are published. It is
therefore necessary that a proactive mechanism is put in place so that Industry is able to effectively
contribute towards development of efficient and relevant Indian standards. One such initiative is
encouraging the Industry associations to create Standardization Cells and Standardization Forums.
Although a few Associations have created such cells it is seen that they are still not fully aware of
the role of and expectations from such Standardization Cells. It is therefore necessary that training
is provided to them to bring in more clarity and increase the effectiveness of such initiatives.

Industry is also responsible for implementation of the published standards. However, lack of
availability of competent quality control personnel is often cited as major reason for nonimplementation of standards. It is therefore necessary that BIS trains Industry personnel regarding
implementation of various standards. Codes of practices, systems and important documents such
as NBC and NEC etc.

2.3
Central/State Government Ministries and Departments - It is important that National
Standards must be open, timely and relevant. At the same time, they must also complement the
National priorities. In order to achieve this, it is necessary that each of the central

ministries/departments must prepare an Annual Programme for Standardisation for the next
financial year, based on the policies and programmes of the ministry/department and after
consultation with the subordinate organisations, R&D bodies, their counterparts in the State
Governments, representatives of Industries concerned and other stakeholders. This will bring in
absolute clarity, therefore, regarding the priority areas for standardisation at the beginning of the
year itself and technical committees can then draw their action plans accordingly. However,
Central and State Ministries/Departments have not undertaken such exercise in the past and may
not have trained personnel to do this task. It is necessary that BIS builds their capacity and
provides adequate handholding through training of the key personnel.

2.4
Academic Institutions - Academic institutions play a crucial role in the formulation of
standards in several ways. Academics conduct research and development in various fields, leading
to the creation of new technologies and innovations. These advancements can be the basis for new
standards to be developed. Academics bring specialized knowledge and expertise to the standards
development process. They can contribute to the development of technical specifications and help
ensure that standards are based on the latest research and best practices. Academia also plays a
role in educating and raising awareness about standards and their importance among students,
researchers, and the broader public.

BIS has signed Memorandums of Understanding (MoUs) with the institutes of eminence for
collaboration in the field of standardization and conformity assessment, co-operation in R&D
including setting up of research infrastructure. It would strengthen and enhance the standards
formulation activity by facilitating Research & Development projects, encouraging involvement
of young minds in the area of standardization process and jointly organizing seminars, conferences,
workshops symposia or lectures, training and short-term education programs. It will also help in
bridging the gap between research and development and commercialization to ensure that new
advancements are in line with industry standards.

Providing training to the experts from academia will ensure that they have a clear understanding
of the standards and procedures involved in the development and maintenance of the standards
and will imbibe the knowledge and skills necessary to effectively participate in the development
and implementation of these standards, for contributing to the overall quality and credibility of the
standards.

2.5
Technical Committee Members - Technical Committee members as well as those
actively contributing to standardization from outside should have a clear understanding of the
standardization processes (national and international) and their underlying principles such as
openness, transparency, impartiality and consensus, effectiveness and relevance, coherence and
performance-based standards. In addition, those involved in drafting of standards should be
equipped with necessary knowledge and be conversant with the norms on drafting standards
covering the form, format, language and presentation of a standard. All the above, would enable
the generation of interest in standardization amongst stakeholders and active involvement, and in
effective participation of committee members and other stakeholders thereby bringing excellence
in the standardization work. BIS would work on various capacity building measures to achieve the
above objectives such as Providing training to existing technical committee members; Ensure
induction training of newly appointed technical committee members; Provide training to
committee leadership on their roles and responsibilities; Conduct training programmes for Chairs,
Conveners and Experts of international technical committees and arm them with necessary skill
sets etc.

2.6
International Trainees - Standardization is important for promoting economic
development, improving quality and safety of products and services, and facilitating trade between
countries. However, many developing countries lack the infrastructure, resources, and expertise to
develop and implement standards effectively. International training programs on standardization
and quality can help bridge this gap by providing participants with the knowledge, skills, and tools
needed to develop and adopt standards that are relevant to their specific needs and contexts

3 OBJECTIVES

The objective of the Annual Training Plan is to establish a documented system model for:

a) Providing training to the identified external and internal stakeholders of BIS
b) Identification of training needs including gap analysis of the Stakeholders
c) Providing need based, work oriented or specialized bespoke trainings solutions
d) Designing and developing training modules for the various training programmes as per the

requirement
e) Developing mechanisms for evaluation of effectiveness of training
f) Continual improvement of the Training designs and materials based on the evaluation
g) Creating pool of Faculty/Resource Person for various training programmes
h) Assessing efficacy of training and/or training modules based on the feedback.
i) Widely publicizing the trainings conducted by BIS to have maximum participation of

stakeholders.

4 TRAINING SETUP OF BIS

National Institute of Training for Standardization (NITS)

4.1
A dedicated training institute, the National Institute of Training for Standardization (NITS)
was established by BIS in 1995, to meet the growing needs and expectations of the industry for
quality training in the fields of standardization, quality assurance, management systems,
certification, laboratory testing, etc. Since then, NITS has been organizing various types of training
programmes for industry, Central/state Govt. bodies, consumer bodies as well as for its own
employees. NITS is one of the training institutes identified by Ministry of External Affairs, Govt.
of India under Special Commonwealth African Assistance Programme (SCAAP), Indian
Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC), Colombo Plan (CP) for developing countries. NITS
has been conducting these programmes for developing countries of Asia, Africa, Europe and Latin
America every year since its inception.

4.2
Keeping in view its expanding activities, a separate training complex was created as NITS,
which started functioning from its new premises in Noida from May 2003. Training facilities
include state of the art computer laboratory, well equipped training halls of different capacities
with modern audio-visual facilities, auditorium, library and wi-fi enabled campus. It has a hostel
with well furnished rooms and facilities for laundry, dining, post training hour recreational
facilities including air-conditioned gym.

4.3 NITS conducts a large variety of programmes on various subjects at its facilities in Noida
campus as well as at its training centers in Chennai, Kolkata, Mumbai, Bangalore, Bhopal,
Hyderabad and Jaipur. NITS also conducts programmes ONLINE. These programmes form part
of NITS Annual Training Calendar and identified as 'On-Campus Programmes'. Such
programmes are open to participation by any interested stakeholder either individually or through
nomination by their respective organisations or registering as an individual. On many occasions,
NITS client organizations require training courses customised for their officers/staff and conducted
at their premises/online. NITS cater to these requirements by imparting the training at the premises
of the clients on request. Such customized programmes conducted on specific request of client
organizations at their premises/online are called as 'Off-Campus Programmes'.

4.4 NITS over the years has acquired the reputation of being the leading institute in the country
offering trainings in the field of standardization, conformity assessment and quality. NITS has
served various organizations from Ministries/Departments of Govt of India and State Govts, PSUs,
private organizations, consumer organizations as well as individual professionals. With the stalling
of physical training activity as a result of the Covid 19 pandemic, NITS smoothly transitioned
towards organizing online courses which were quite popular and were greatly appreciated. So far
NITS has trained more than 10,000 professionals in various areas of standardization, product
testing, management systems, laboratory systems and control and consumer awareness.

4.5 NITS Organizational Structure

HEAD, NITS

ADMIN &
FINANCE WING

TRAINING

WING

AD (A&F)

SO (A&F)

ASO

Assisting Staff

SCIENTIFIC

OFFICERS

MANAGEMENT

EXECUTIVES

SO (Training)

Assisting Staff

DDG, PRT

DG, BIS

5.
APPROACH & METHODOLOGY

5.1
NITS has developed a systematic approach to training based on the Plan-Do-Check-Act
(PDCA) model for continual improvement of training processes for imparting consistent, efficient
and enhanced trainings for accomplishing organizational goals. It involves following steps:

a) Analysis and Identification: In this phase, training needs are identified i.e. who needs
training, what do they need to learn and estimating training cost, etc. to design bespoke training
solutions.

b) Designing and Developing: In this phase we develop objectives of training, identify the
learning steps, sequence & structures the contents and baselines the performance measure This
phase also involves defining pedagogy, selecting delivery method, developing the training
material and validating information to be imparted to make sure it accomplishes all the goals
and objectives.

c) Implementation: NITS shall be putting the training into practice with the defined plan.

d) Evaluation: Each phase of the trainings shall be evaluated through feedbacks, assessments,
follow ups, etc., so as to make sure it has achieved its aim in terms of subsequent work
performance and recommend necessary amendments for continual improvement of the training
solutions.

5.2
Analysis and Identification

5.2.1 The first step of the training strategy is to identify the target groups and assess their training
needs of the stakeholders. For this purpose, a Coordination and Monitoring Committee (CMC)
shall be constituted for Training Needs Analysis and Identification with following members:

a) DDG(Policy, Research and Training) - Chairperson
b) DDG ( Certification)
c) DDG ( Standardization -I)
d) DDG (Laboratory)
e) DDG (Management Systems Certification)
f) DDG (Hallmarking)
g) H(NITS) - Member Secretary

5.2.2 The Coordination Committee shall analyse and assess the training needs of the stakeholders
to design bespoke training solutions. The requests received from other Organizations shall also be
considered.

5.2.3 The Coordination and Monitoring Committee, based on the training need analysis of BIS,
its employees, Industries, Consumers and other stakeholders shall develop Training Calendar for
the Financial Year, which will be put up to DG, BIS for approval.

5.3
Designing and Developing

5.3.1 Designing and Developing are important component of systematic approach to training.
Designing involves enlisting active participation of the personnel at varying levels, defining the
objectives, identifying the resource persons and selecting appropriate methods and techniques for
training. Developing the content involves defining the learning steps, sequencing & structuring the
contents. The training content must be tailored to the specific duties, roles and responsibilities of
the trainees in a particular group to achieve the purpose of training effectively and efficiently.

5.3.2 Content Development Committees (CDC)

Content Development Committees shall be constituted for NITS interventions and deliverables, as
required, for designing and development of their content and course material. CDCs shall be
constituted by NITS (with approval of DDG(PRT)) and will typically comprise of Subject Matter
Experts (SMEs) from BIS, Industries and other relevant organizations.

5.3.3 Delivery Modes

5.3.3.1 The training programmes would be conducted in the following delivery modes:

a) On - Campus Training Programmes: These Programmes are open to participation by the

identified stakeholder group and are delivered at NITS, Noida or any other premises chosen
by NITS. These trainings are planned at the starting of each Financial Year and are
scheduled in Training Calendar.

b) Off- Campus Training Programmes: Customized training programmes for a specific client

Organisation (PSUs/Industries etc.,) at their location.

c) Online Training Programmes: Both On-Campus and Off- Campus training Programmes

can be delivered online.

d) E-learning Mode: e‐learning provides unparalleled opportunities for meeting the training

needs for stakeholders across the country. Technology provides the means to make a vast
resource of learning material, online courses and webinars, etc., available readily,
providing individuals with enormous choice & flexibility in learning.

e) Blended Learning Approach: Blended learning is an approach that combines online

learning including virtual classrooms, with traditional place-based classroom methods
through opportunities for interaction(s) online. Audio-visual educational material would
be developed by BIS for blended learning.

5.4
Implementation

NITS shall be putting the training into practice with the defined plan.

5.5
Training Evaluation

The objective of training evaluation is to enhance the training programmes by building on the
strengths, by removing the shortcomings (if any). The method of evaluating the effectiveness of

training programmes shall be based on the concept that it is the "process" (and not "outcome") of
training, which is to be evaluated for its effectiveness, in order to ensure the effectiveness of the
training programmes. The "P3 Model" model shall be used which includes evaluation of three
different phases of training, i.e. "Pre-training phase", "Pro-training phase" and the "Post-training
phase" to assess the quality of the training and to ensure that the training objectives were met.
Accordingly, following tools shall be used for the evaluation at these phases:

a)
Pre- training assessments : Pre - assessment shall be conducted before the training
begins to measure the participants' knowledge, skills, and abilities related to the training
topic. It can be done through questionnaires, quizzes and workshops. It shall be used to
identify the participants' strengths and weaknesses, and to tailor the training program to
meet their needs. They also provide a baseline against which the participants' progress
can be measured.

b)
Pro-assessment: This assessment shall be conducted during the training program to
measure the participants' understanding of the training material as it is being presented.
This can be done through assessing the participation of the trainee in workshops, quizzes
and role plays etc. It is used to provide feedback to the trainers and to the participants,
and to identify areas where additional clarification or support is needed.

c)
Post-assessment: This is an assessment conducted after the training program to measure
the participants' knowledge, skills, and abilities related to the training topic. Postassessments are used to evaluate the effectiveness of the training program and to
measure the participants' progress. It can be done through Assessment, feedback and
follow -up. Assessments may be conducted immediately after the training. The
performance of the participants in these assessments indicates the learning gained by the
participants. Feedback on content, resource persons, comprehension, engagement, etc
of the training shall be obtained at the end of the training through feedback forms,
emails, etc. Suggestions may also be sought from the participants. Provision of
uploading video testimonials by the participants may also be given on the portal. Follow
up may be done with the trainees to ensure that the training program has been effective
in achieving its goals.

5.5.1 The overall Training Effectiveness evaluation would depend on the proposition, "A high
score on the effectiveness of pre-training factors, pro-training factors and post-training factors
jointly, will lead to the effectiveness of the training programmes."

5.5.2 The Coordination and Monitoring Committee shall review the training modules (including
faculty) with respect to the following parameters on the basis of the evaluation done at the end of
each financial year, so as to make sure it has achieved its aim and recommend necessary
amendments for continual improvement of the trainings.

a) Relevancy of the content
b) Resource Persons
c) Frequency of the course
d) Participation

5.6
Communication, Promotion & Marketing of Training Programmes

5.6.1 Once the training programme and modules have been developed, the next important step
is to publicize it among the stakeholders. The promotion and marketing of the training courses
offered may be done through email, social media, telephone, bulk messages, website etc.

5.6.2 A dedicated Communication and PR team at NITS will be in regular interaction with the
prominent industry associations, organisations, Realtors, State Government Departments,
Municipal Departments, etc for marketing and publicity of the trainings. Testimonials of the
participants from reputed organisations may also be hosted on the website, social media, etc.

5.7
Creating the Expert Pool

5.7.1 A pool of experts will be created to be utilized as faculty for various training programmes.
With a focus on exponential learning, it is also planned to develop training modules for use of
resource personnel for imparting training in a uniform manner whether through classroom method
or online mechanisms, for facilitating delivery of superior training experience to audience at one
or multiple locations.

5.7.2 Although BIS has core competence in providing training on standardization and conformity
assessment, it is desirable to enlarge the pool of experts or collaborate with institution having such
expertise for providing training in areas such as soft skills, GFR and finance related issues, eprocurement, establishment and secretatrial matters etc. Accordingly, BIS shall enter into strategic
alliances with premier training institutes to fill this gap area, to enhance its pool of experts.

5.8
Calibration of Trainers

Meetings may be conducted of the Trainers with the trainers of peer organisations conducting
similar trainings for improving the quality of training delivery, standardizing training practices,
and promoting professional development and networking among trainers. By coming together to
share their experiences and expertise, trainers can contribute to the growth and development of the
training solutions.

5.9
Peer Evaluation

5.9.1 The officials from NITS may get the training from peer organisations to assess the quality
of its training and gain insights into best practices, learn new training techniques, and compare the
quality of training offered by NITS with that of theirs. NITS shall research and identify training
institutes that offer similar training programs and look for institutes that have a good reputation
and track record in delivering quality training. Officers may be deputed to attend these Training
Programs offered by these institutes to gain first hand experience of their training delivery and
methods to take note of the strengths and weaknesses of the training programs and compare them
with the training programs offered by NITS. Based on the analyses, NITS shall identify areas for
improvement in training programs and implement changes to improve the quality of training
delivery.

5.9.2 Relationship may be established and maintained with the peer training institutes and other
training professionals to continue learning and exchanging best practices and build a network of
training professionals and contribute to the overall growth and development of the training
industry.

5.10 Training Portal

Under the initiative of e-BIS, a training module has been developed covering all the processes of
training including user and faculty interfaces. It would facilitate efficient response for training
needs of BIS employees as well as external stakeholders, creation of a comprehensive database of
trainees, trainers, course materials, case studies, etc. Any interested person/ organisation would be
able to propose and apply for training programmes through this portal.

5.11 Budget & Finance

BIS would allocate adequate funds to training & development activities for meeting the
stipulated training requirement. BIS as a progressive organization and model employer accepts
and appreciates that "Expenditure is not what it costs to train, but what it costs not to train". Thus,
the financial commitment towards realization of tenets of training action plan shall be treated as
investment rather than expenditure.

5.12 Interventions and Deliverables

5.12.1 Capsule Courses

• Capsule course on the National Building Code of India (NBC) - 2016
• Capsule course on national electrical code of India (NEC)
• Product Specific Capsule courses for the Quality Control Personnel for Industries and

Licensees
• Capsule courses on important Codes of practices, Guidelines and Systems Standards
• Capsule Courses on Test Methods of Important Standards.

5.12.2 Training Programme for Standardization Cells & Technical Committee Members

• Capacity-building of the members of Standardization Cells of Industry Associations.
• Training of division council and technical committee members.
• Training of the professionals representing country in TCs of ISO and IEC.

5.12.3 Training Programmes for Science Teachers Faculties of Technical Institutions and

Students

• Training of Science Teachers as a part of Learning Science via Standards.
• Week-long Summer Vacation programmes on Learning Science via Standards for students.
• Training programmes for the faculty of engineering and professional colleges.

+

5.12.4 Management system programmes

• Lead Auditor Courses for various Management Systems, such as Quality Management

Systems as per IS/ISO 9001:2015, Occupational Health Management Systems as per IS/ISO
45001:2018, Environmental Management Systems as per IS/ISO 14001: 2015, Food Safety
Management Systems as per IS/ISO 22000: 2018 etc.

5.12.5 Laboratory Training programmes

• Laboratory Quality Management System and Internal Audit as per IS/ISO/IEC 17025:2017
• Medical Laboratories Quality Systems and Internal Audit as per IS/ISO 15189:2022
• Measurement Uncertainty (MU)
• Inter Lab Comparison, Proficiency Testing and Evaluation of Scores (ILC,PT)

5.12.6 Certificate courses

• Certificate Courses on Assaying and Hallmarking
• Certificate Courses for Quality Control Personnel

5.12.7 International outreach

• ITP on Management Systems
• ITP on Standardization and Conformity Assessment
• ITP on Laboratory Quality Management System
• Customized Trainings for other NSBs

5.12.8 Outreach Training Programmes

• Orientation Programme for the officers of Police, Customs, CPMFs, railways, PSUs and

other such organisations.
• Training Programmes for the professionals of other countries.
• Training Programmes for Central & State Govt. Departments/ Regulators/

Procurement agencies, for guiding them in use of Standards in govt. policies/
procurements/ regulations.
• Training Programmes for Municipal Corporations
• Training Programmes for the Resident Welfare Associations (RWAs) and NGOs

5.12.9 For BIS Employees

• Induction Level Training
• Refresher Courses
• Training on Project Management
• Training on Time Management
• Training on Quality Management
• Leadership Programme for Senior Management
• Training on Administrative and Financial Matters
• Lead Auditor Courses for various Management Systems

6.
CAPSULE COURSE ON NATIONAL BUILDING CODE OF INDIA 2016 (NBC
2016)

6.1
Introduction

National Building Code of India 2016 (NBC 2016) is a prestigious publication of Bureau of Indian
Standards (BIS) which is widely used by the various stakeholders, such as building regulatory
departments, government construction departments, builders/developers, private construction
agencies/contractors, building material manufacturers and suppliers, building professionals (like
civil engineers, structural engineers, architects, urban designers, landscape architects, town
planners and building services engineers) and consultants, academic institutions and R&D
organizations.

NBC 2016 is intended to help regulate and guide the building construction activity in the whole of
the country, particularly the municipal corporations, municipalities, development authorities and
other local bodies, public works departments and other construction departments and agencies
dealing with land development and building construction. NBC 2016 thus serves as a model for
adoption by PWDs and other construction departments, local bodies and other construction
agencies. The Code focuses on functionality, accessibility, sustainability and safety covering
structural safety, fire safety, health safety and public safety. The Code covers aspects such as
administration; development control rules; general building requirements; fire and life safety;
selection of building materials; structural design using various material streams; construction
project management, practices and safety; various building and plumbing services; sustainability
in buildings and built environment; and asset and facility management.
The country is on the path of rapid urbanization and development. Considering the importance of
the Code in ensuring quality and safety of the buildings and related infrastructure, it is important
that various stakeholders contributing to building planning, design, construction and operation and
maintenance are well aware of the provisions of NBC 2016 for judicious implementation of the
provisions and intent of the Code. Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), being the National Standards
Body of the country through its training arm, the National Institute of Training for Standardization
(NITS) has designed the following short-term courses on NBC 2016 for national capacity building:

1. Accessibility in Buildings and Built Environment;
2. Fire and Life Safety;
3. Structural Design;
4. Soil and Foundation Engineering;
5. Air Conditioning, Heating and Mechanical Ventilation; and
6. Plumbing Services.

6.2
Objectives

a)
Bridging the competence gap in the skills of personnel currently involved & working with
the municipal corporations, municipalities, development authorities, public works departments and
other construction agencies, builders/developers, building professionals, etc involved in land
development and building construction activities.

b)
Making participants skilled enough to be achieving proficiency in building design and
construction including matters relating to quality, safety and accessibility.

6.3
Course Structure

Sl No.
Name of the

Course

Duration
Topics Covered

Capsule Course on
Accessibility in
Buildings and Built
Environment

2 Days
• Introduction and Awareness Raising
• Access for All - Legal and Policy

Framework
• Introduction to National Building Code of

India 2016, Applicability, Scope,
Terminology
• Universal Design
• Anthropometrics
• Accessible Parking
• Approach to the Building and Building

Entrances
• Internal Circulation
• Level Changes/Vertical Circulation
• Elevators/Lifts - Design Considerations
• Sanitary Facilities
• Tactile Ground Surface Indicators
• Signage
• Retrofitting in Existing Buildings
Capsule course on
Fire and Life Safety

2 Days
• Introduction and Overview of NBC 2016
• Fire Prevention
• Life Safety
• Fire Protection
• Additional Occupancy-wise Requirements
• Special Requirements for High Rise

Buildings, Atrium, Commercial Buildings
and Car Parking Facilities
• Special Occupancies (Hospitals, Malls

and Multiplexes, Datacentres)
• Metro Trainways and Metro Stations
• Case Studies

Capsule course on
Structural Design

3 Days
• Introduction and Overview of NBC 2016
• Plain, Reinforced and Prestressed

Concrete
• Prefabricated Concrete
• Masonry
• Timber and Bamboo

Sl No.
Name of the

Course

Duration
Topics Covered

• Discussions on Defects in Construction

Leading to Adverse Impact on Structural
Performance
• Steel Design
• Glass and Glazing
• Soil and Foundation
Capsule Course on
Soil and Foundation
Engineering

2 Days
• Introduction and Overview of NBC 2016
• Sub-surface Investigation
• Shallow Foundations
• Deep Foundations
• Ground Improvement
• Case Studies
• Special Projects - Experiences and

Learnings
Capsule Course on
Air Conditioning,
Heating and
Mechanical
Ventilation

2 Days
• Introduction and Overview of NBC 2016
• Planning and Design for HVAC system
• Selection of Air Conditioning Products

and System Based on Design
Considerations
• Installation, Commissioning and

Operation and Maintenance
• Sustainability and Performance Validation
• Specialized HVAC System
Capsule Course on
Plumbing Services

2 Days
• Introduction and Overview of NBC 2016
• Water Supply
• Drainage
• Gas Supply
• Solid Waste Management
• Water Efficient Plumbing Products
• Case Studies
• Special Projects - Experiences and

Learnings

6.4
Target Participants
All those concerned with city planning, building regulation, and planning, design, construction and
maintenance of buildings and built assets and facilities. Initially officers of BIS from Civil
Discipline shall also be trained to use them further as faculty.

6.5
Frequency and Batch Size
No of Programmes in a year- 18 (6 Courses x 3 per year) with batch size 20 (Min) - 40 (Max)
participants

6.6
Content Development Committee

6.6.1 The Content development Committee for each of the above Courses shall constitute of

following members:

a) 01 Representative from CED
b) 02 Representatives from Industry nominated by CED
c) 01 Representative from NITS

6.7
Resource Person / Faculty
 Competent personnel from Industry, academia, professional, overseas experts and BIS.

6.8
Training Methodology

a) Interactive Classroom Sessions.
b) Workshops and Case Studies.

6.9
Continual Improvement
The Coordination Committee shall evaluate each phase of the trainings through feedbacks,
assessments, follow ups, etc, so as to make sure it has achieved its aim in terms of subsequent work
performance and recommend necessary amendments for continual improvement of the training
solutions

6.10
Communication - Promotion & Marketing
E-Mails and Letters to building regulatory departments, government construction departments,
builders/developers, private construction agencies/contractors, building material manufacturers
and suppliers, building professionals (like civil engineers, structural engineers, architects, urban
designers, landscape architects, town planners and building services engineers) and consultants,
academic institutions and R&D organizations.

7.
Capsule Course on National Electrical Code of India 2023 (SP 30)

7.1 Introduction

7.1.1 National Electrical Code of India (SP 30) is a prestigious publication of Bureau of Indian
Standards (BIS) which is widely used by the various stakeholders, such as electrical engineers of
State Electrical Inspectorate, Central & State Public Works Dept., State Electricity Board,
Municipal Authorities, Distribution Companies, Fire Dept., Electrical Consultants, Electrical
Contractors, Developers & Builders (Electrical Engineers), Architects, Railways and Industry
Stakeholders, academic institutions and R&D organizations.

7.1.2 National Electrical Code of India is a comprehensive document covering standard good
practices for selection of various items of electrical equipment, electrical installations in buildings
for different occupancies and, additional precautions to be taken for use of electrical equipment
for special environmental conditions like explosive and active atmosphere, and solar photovoltaic
power systems. Reference to NEC is also given in Central Electricity Authority (Measures relating
to Safety and Electric Supply) Regulations, 2010.

7.1.3 The country is on the path of rapid urbanization and development. Considering the
importance of the Code in ensuring quality and safety of the electrical installations, it is important
that various stakeholders contributing to planning, design, installations and testing of electrical
installations are well aware of the provisions of NEC for its judicious implementation. Bureau of
Indian Standards (BIS), being the National Standards Body of the country through its training arm,
the National Institute of Training for Standardization (NITS) has planned to conduct the shortterm course on National Electrical Code of India for national capacity building.

7.2 Objectives

7.2.1 To spread awareness of the National Electrical Code of India and to ensure proper
interpretation of the standards.

7.2.2 Bridging the competence gap in the skills of personnel currently involved & working with
the public works departments and other construction agencies dealing with design and erection
of Electrical Installations.

7.2.3 Making participants skilled enough to be achieving quality as per prescribed standards.

7.3 Course Structure

a) Overview of Standards on Electrical Safety
b) Importance of National Electrical Code of India
c) Overview of Electricity Act, CEA regulations and correlating role of Standards and Code
d) Understanding stages of electrical work, stakeholders, and their respective role.
e) Designing layouts, drawings, load assessment, designing distribution, SLDs.
f) Protection for Safety - electric shock, thermal effect (fire due to short circuit), over current

& short circuit, over voltages, EMI, Lightning protection and Surge protection

g) Selection and erection of equipment - Wiring system, conductor, cross-section,

insulation, Isolation, switching, control.
h) System earthing - Earthing arrangement Safety in each network, Equipment earthing,

Earthing of DG, UPS, electronic equipment
i) Protective Equipotential Bonding and Protective conductors
j) Verification and testing - Inspection during construction and after completion
k) Statutory provisions - Act, Rules, Regulations, role of CEA, Electrical Inspectors
l) Standby Generation stations, Transformer sub-stations, Electrical Installations in Special

Locations

7.4 Target Participants

7.4.1 Electrical Engineers of all key sectors such as:

a) State Chief Electrical Inspectorate
b) Central & State Public Works Dept and Railways
c) State Electricity Board, Municipal Authorities, Fire Dept, Railways, RERA
d) Distribution Companies and Industry Stakeholders
e) Consultants, Contractors, Developers, Builders and Architects.

7.5 Frequency and Batch Size
No of Programmes in a year - 4, duration 2 days, with batch size 20 (Min) - 40 (Max) participants

7.6 Content Development Committee

a) 01 Representative from ETD
b) 02 Representatives from Industry nominated by ETD
c) 01 Representative from NITS

7.7 Resource Person / Faculty
Competent personnel from BIS, Industry, academia, professional and overseas experts.

7.8 Training Methodology

a) Interactive Classroom Sessions.
b) Workshops and Case Studies.

7.9 Continual Improvement
The Coordination Committee shall evaluate each phase of the trainings through feedbacks,
assessments, follow ups, etc, so as to make sure it has achieved its aim in terms of subsequent work
performance and recommend necessary amendments for continual improvement of the training
solutions

7.10 Communication - Promotion & Marketing

E-Mails and Letters to State Electrical Inspectorate, Central & State Public Works Dept., State
Electricity Board, Municipal Authorities, Distribution Companies, Fire Dept., Electrical
Consultants, Electrical Contractors, Developers & Builders (Electrical Engineers), Architects,
Railways and Industry Stakeholders, academic institutions and R&D organizations.

8.
Training Programme for Members of Division Councils, Technical Committees and
Experts in National/International Committees

8.1
Introduction

8.1.1 Standards formulation process at BIS is carried out through Technical Committees
functioning under 16 Division Councils of BIS.

8.1.2 There is need to sensitize the Members of Division Councils, Technical Committees and
Experts in National/International Committees and to orient them towards the processes and
procedures of BIS to function efficiently and in an effective manner.

8.2
Objectives

a) To orient the members towards the processes and procedures of BIS for Standard

Formulation activity.

b) To train them for their role in the process of standard formulation.

8.3
Course Structure

a) Basic Concepts of Standardization - Aims, Principles, Levels of Standardization and

Standards Eco-system and other relevant aspects
b) An Overview of BIS Standardization Initiatives, SFM, SNAP & Strategic Roadmap
c) Standards Formulation Process - Stages of Work and Stakeholders engagement
d) Structure and Composition of Technical Committees
e) Function of Technical Committees and Participation in sectional committee meetings
f) Appointment of Chairman/Convenors and Nomination of members
g) Responsibilities of Chairman and Members
h) Review of standards - Revision, Amendment, Reaffirmation, Withdrawals, supersession,

Concurrent running
i) Action Research Based Approach for review of standards
j) Role in carrying out review and revision of standards
k) Standardization Portal: Features and Role of Standardization cell Members

(proposfals for new subjects, submission of comments, accessing documents, ARPs etc.)
l) Experience Sharing of Good practices by Standardization cells
m) Hands on workshop on Standards Formulation
n) International Standardization and Participation in International Standardization Work

(International Standardization Process, NWIP)
o) WTO-TBT Enquiry point; Bilateral and Regional Co-operations (MRA's), Domestic &

International Trade Practices; Trade Facilitation International Standardization Procedures
p) Nomination & Roles and Responsibilities of Experts

q) Harmonization with International Standards, Adoption of ISO/IEC Standards &ISO/IEC

Guide 21
r) BIS experience in International Standardization Handling of Secretariat TC's at ISO/IEC
s) Drafting of Indian Standards as per IS 12
t) Role of Standards w.r.t SDGs & Climate Change

8.4
Target Participants
Members of Division Councils, Technical Committees and Experts in National/International
Committees
8.5
Frequency and Batch Size
No of Programmes in a year - 5 for Members of Division Councils, Technical Committees and 2
for Chairs/Convenors/Experts in International Committees, duration of 2 days with batch size 20
(Min) - 40 (Max) participants

8.6
Content Development Committee

a) 01 Representative from SCMD
b) 02 Representatives from Standards Formulating Department nominated by SCMD

depending on the industry)
c) 01 Representative from NITS

8.7
Resource Person / Faculty
 Competent personnel from BIS and Industry.

8.8
Training Methodology

a) Interactive Classroom Sessions.
b) Workshops and Case Studies.

8.9
Communication - Promotion & Marketing

E-Mails and Letters to Members of Division Councils, Technical Committees and Experts in
National/International Committees in co-ordination with SCMD

9.
Training Programme for Standardization Cells of Government Departments Officials,
SDOs and Industry Associations

9.1 Introduction

9.1.1 BIS has formulated more than twenty-one thousand standards. If one goes by the number

of the product standards under the Conformity Assessment Schemes, less than one percent
have been adopted by the industry. Actual percentage may be slightly higher because of the
fact that many of the standards are followed because of their mention in the government
regulations without being covered under a Conformity Assessment Scheme.

9.1.2 The Government Departments and Industry Associations can play a leading role in the

process of standard formulation and it starts from identification of the areas for standard
formulation to the implementation of the standards after they have been published. The
proactive role Industry Associations or large industries can play in standard formulation
becomes clearer when we look at the practices followed in other countries. Standardization
Cells in other Standards Developing Organizations (SDOs) may provide vital inputs for
standardization in emerging areas.

9.1.3 The standardization Cells formed by Government Departments and Industry Associations

are expected to engage and contribute effectively in various activities of standard
formulation such as identification of new product standards, review & revision of existing
standards, implementation of standards, Action Research Projects (ARPs) etc. However, it
was observed that Standardization Cells are not very clear about their role in development
and implementation of standards. Thus, there is need to sensitize the members of
Standardization Cells and to orient them towards the processes and procedures of BIS for
these Standardization Cells to function efficiently and in an effective manner.

9.2 Objectives

a) To sensitize the members of Standardization Cells and to orient them towards the processes

and procedures of BIS for these Standardization Cells to function efficiently and in an
effective manner.
b) To train the members of Standardization Cells for their role in the process of standard

formulation.

9.3 Course Structure

a) Basic Concepts of Standardization - Aims, Principles, Levels of Standardization and

Standards Eco-system and other relevant aspects
b) An Overview of BIS Standardization Initiatives, SFM, SNAP & Strategic Roadmap
c) Standardization cells - Purpose & Expectations
d) Standards Formulation Process - Stages of Work and Stakeholders engagement
e) Structure and Composition of Technical Committees

f) Function of Technical Committees and Participation in sectional committee meetings
g) Appointment of Chairman/Convenors and Nomination of members
h) Responsibilities of Chairman and Members
i) Review of standards - Revision, Amendment, Reaffirmation, Withdrawals, supersession,

Concurrent running
j) Action Research Based Approach for review of standards
k) Role in carrying out review and revision of standards
l) Standardization Portal: Features and Role of Standardization cell Members

a. (proposals for new subjects, submission of comments, accessing documents,

ARPs etc.)
m) Experience Sharing of Good practices by Standardization cells
n) Hands on workshop on Standards Formulation
o) International Standardization and Participation in International Standardization Work

(International Standardization Process, NWIP)
p) WTO-TBT Enquiry point; Bilateral and Regional Co-operations (MRA's), Domestic &

International Trade Practices; Trade Facilitation International Standardization Procedures
q) Nomination & Roles and Responsibilities of Experts
r) Harmonization with International Standards, Adoption of ISO/IEC Standards &ISO/IEC

Guide 21
s) BIS experience in International Standardization Handling of Secretariat TC's at ISO/IEC
t) Drafting of Indian Standards as per IS 12
u) Role of Standards w.r.t SDGs & Climate Change

9.4 Target Participants
Members of Standardization Cells of Government Departments and Industry Associations

9.5 Frequency and Batch Size
No of Programmes in a year - 5 for Government Departments , 5 for Industry Associations and 2
for SDOs, duration of 2 days with batch size 20 (Min) - 40 (Max) participants

9.6 Content Development Committee

a) 01 Representative from SCMD
b) 02 Representatives from Standards Formulating Department nominated by SCMD

depending on the industry)
c) 01 Representative from NITS

9.7 Resource Person / Faculty
 Competent personnel from BIS and Industry.

9.8 Training Methodology

a) Interactive Classroom Sessions.
b) Workshops and Case Studies.

9.9 Communication - Promotion & Marketing

a) E-Mails and Letters to Members of Standardization Cells
b) Regular Interaction with the Government Departments and Industry Associations.

 Outreach Training Programme for Orientation of the officials of Central and State Govt.
departments, Police, PHE, PWD, Irrigation, CAPF, PSUs etc
10.1
Introduction
With increased emphasis on quality goods and continuous issue of Quality Control Orders by
Govt of India, there is a need to sensitize the officials of Government Departments, PSUs etc
regarding standards related to their activity and role of BIS in standardization and conformity
assessment.

10.2 Objectives

a) To sensitize the officials of Govt departments/PSUs about BIS activities
b) To train the officials in area of sector specific standards

10.3 Course Structure

a) Basic Concepts of Standardization - Aims, Principles, Levels of Standardization and

Standards Eco-system and other relevant aspects
b) An Overview of BIS Standardization Initiatives, SFM, SNAP & Strategic Roadmap
c) Standardization cells - Purpose & Expectations
d) Standards Formulation Process - Stages of Work and Stakeholders engagement
e) Structure and Composition of Technical Committees
f) Function of Technical Committees and Participation in sectional committee meetings
g) Review of standards - Revision, Amendment, Reaffirmation, Withdrawals, supersession,

Concurrent running
h) Action Research Based Approach for review of standards
i) Role in carrying out review and revision of standards
j) Standardization Portal: Features and Role of Standardization cell Members

a. (Proposals for new subjects, submission of comments, accessing documents,

ARPs etc.)
k) Experience Sharing of Good practices by Standardization cells
l) Hands on workshop on Standards Formulation
m) Role of Standards w.r.t SDGs & Climate Change
n) Department related standards
o) Conformity Assessment Schemes and QCOs

10.4 Target Participants
Officials of respective Government Departments/PSUs

10.5 Frequency and Batch Size
No of Programmes in a year - 1 for each Government Departments/PSU identified, duration of 2
days with batch size 20 (Min) - 40 (Max) participants

10.6 Content Development Committee

d) 01 Representative from TNMD & CMD-I
e) 01 Representatives from Standards Formulating Department nominated by SCMD

depending on the department)
f) 01 Representative from NITS

10.7 Resource Person / Faculty
 Competent personnel from BIS.

10.8 Training Methodology

a) Interactive Classroom Sessions.
b) Workshops and Case Studies.

10.9 Communication - Promotion & Marketing

a) E-Mails and Letters to respective departments
b) Regular Interaction with the departments

Capsule Course for Quality Control Personnel of Industries & Licensees and testing
personnel of Labs

11.1 Introduction

11.1.1 Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) being the National Standards Body of the country
discharges multitude of functions and services for enhancing the quality ecosystem in the Country.
The activities of BIS include standards formulation at national and international level, conformity
assessment schemes (Product Certification, Systems Certification, Registration and Hallmarking)
testing and training. All these activities are carried out through their network of headquarters,
regional and branch office and labs spread throughout the country.

11.1.2 Lack of technical expertise of the Quality Control Personnel has been pointed out as one
of the constraints faced by the Industry while obtaining/operating BIS licenses. This gap is
increasing with many new products coming under mandatory BIS certification. In order to bridge
this gap, National Institute of Training for Standardization (NITS), the training arm of BIS has
planned to conduct short term Capsule Courses (2-days) for Quality control personnel through BIS
Branch Offices across India.

11.1.3 The courses on products will be conducted for Quality control personnel of industries in
specific products like Packaged Drinking Water, Electric Cables & Conductors, Steel products,
Pipes & Pipe Fittings, Skimmed Milk Powder, Domestic Appliances, Pumps & Motors, Toys,
Textile Products, Cement & related Products, Plywood, etc. based on the concentration of industry
in the area where the course is being conducted. These programmes will not only facilitate
compliance to Indian Standards but also contribute to the national capacity building leading to
enhanced Quality Ecosystem in the country. The courses on test methods will be conducted for
testing personnel in industries as well as in labs

11.2
Learning Objectives
a) Bridging the competence gap in the skills of Quality Control and Testing Personnel.
b) Making participants skilled enough to be achieving quality as per prescribed standards.

11.3
Course Structure
a) Understanding requirements of related Indian Standards.
b) Discussion on testing parameters including Sample Preparation and conditioning of

samples.
c) Explanation of product manual / SIT / any specific guidelines and record keeping.
d) Understanding guidelines for grant/inclusion/renewal/operation of licenses.
e) Features of ManakOnline & other BIS e-portals.
f) Exercises and Workshops on above topics.
g) Lab Visit for practical demonstration of testing of important/critical parameters.

11.4
Target participants
 Quality Control and Testing Personnel of relevant industry and labs.

11.5
Frequency and Batch Size
No of Programmes in a year - 4 on products & 4 on test methods per BO per year, duration of 2
days with batch size 20 (Min) - 40 (Max) participants

11.6
Content Development Committee

a) 01 Representative from concerned CMD (nominated by CMD1)
b) 01 Representative from BIS Lab (nominated by LPPD)
c) 01 Representatives from Industry (nominated by CMD1)
d) 01 Representative from NITS

11.7
Resource Person / Faculty
Competent personnel from BIS and Industry.

11.8
Training Methodology
Classroom based with combination of lectures, presentations, videos, case studies and interactive
workshops.

11.9
Continual Improvement
The Coordination Committee shall evaluate each phase of the trainings through feedbacks,
assessments, follow ups, etc, so as to make sure it has achieved its aim in terms of subsequent work
performance and recommend necessary amendments for continual improvement of the training
solutions.

11.10 Communication - Promotion & Marketing

E-Mails and Letters to Licensees and Industry associations.

12 Certificate Course on Assaying & Hallmarking

12.1 Introduction

Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) operates the BIS Hallmarking Scheme for Gold and Silver
Jewellery / Artefacts. Hallmarking provides third party assurance on purity or fineness of Jewellery
/ artefacts marked. As per this Scheme, registration is granted t the jewelers to sell hallmarked
Jewellery. Such registered jewellers can get their Jewellery hallmarked from any of the BIS
recognized Assaying ad Hallmarking Centers where the Jewellery / artefacts are tested to check
their declared purity or fineness. Only such Jewellery / artefacts which are found conforming are
hallmarked through laser marking.

As per Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery and Gold Artefacts Order, 2020 issued by the Government
of India vide S. O. no. 205 (E) dated 15 -01-2020, Hallmarking of gold Jewellery and artefacts
(weighing 2 gm and above) will become mandatory from 01 June 2021.

The Assaying and Hallmarking Centers employ testing personnel for performing the assay (testing
of purity of precious metal) and therefore the competence of testing personnel has a direct bearing
on the reliability of the Hallmark. With the implementation of the above Order, the demand for
competent testing personnel for assaying is expected to increase exponentially.

12.2 Learning Objectives

a) Bridging the competence gap in the skills of Assaying and Hallmarking personnel.
b) Making participants skilled enough to be employed as Assaying & Hallmarking Personnel

in Assaying & Hallmarking Centers.

12.3 Course Structure

a) Introduction to Indian Standards on Gold & Silver, BIS Act & Rules
b) Introduction to BIS Hallmarking Scheme
c) BIS (Hallmarking Regulations), Guidelines, other Regulatory Requirements and

Laboratory good practices
d) The Hallmarking Regulations, Chapter I, II & III
e) Introduction to Indian standard on Precious metals, IS 2112, 2113,1417, 1418
f) Introduction to Indian standard on Delivery Bar, IS 17278
g) Indian Standard for AHCs, IS 15820-All Organizational, Managerial and Technical

Requirements
h) Guidelines for Recognition & Operation of Assaying & Hallmarking Centres, Grant of

Registration to Jewellers and Guidelines for Grant of Licence to Refineries
i) Good Laboratory Practices and Basic Lab safety Practices
j) X-Ray Fluorescence Principle & Operation
k) Sampling Techniques for precious metals analysis (Theory and Practical)
l) Fire Assay Technique for Gold (Theory and Practical)

m) Potentiometric method for Silver Assay
n) Assaying of Silver (Potentiometric) Method (Practical)
o) Practical exposure of the activities undertaken in assaying and hallmarking Centre -

Training on Hallmarking at A&H Centre
p) Final Examination at Referral Assay Lab (2 hours theory examination & 6 Hours

practical examination)

12.4 Target participants

a) Personnel currently working in the Assaying and Hallmarking Centres
b) Assayers and Artisans
c) Persons wanting to make a career in the Assaying and Hallmarking field.

12.5 Frequency and Batch Size
No of Programmes in a year - 4 per year, duration of 5 weeks with batch size of Max 20
participants.

12.6 Content Development Committee

a. 01 Representative from HMD
b. 01 Representative from BIS Lab(nominated by LPPD)
c. 01 Representatives from Industry nominated by HMD
d. 01 Representative from NITS

12.7 Resource Person / Faculty
Competent personnel from BIS and Industry.

12.8 Training Methodology
Blended approach - Online theory classes, practical classes in BIS labs and practical
demonstration at identified A&H Centre.

12.9 Continual Improvement
The Coordination Committee shall evaluate each phase of the trainings through feedbacks,
assessments, follow ups, etc, so as to make sure it has achieved its aim in terms of subsequent work
performance and recommend necessary amendments for continual improvement of the training
solutions.

12.10 Communication - Promotion & Marketing
E-Mails and Letters to Licensees and Industry associations.

13 Week-long Summer Vacation Training Programme on Learning Science via Standards

for Students & Teachers

13.1
Introduction

1.1.1 Children are the future and form the foundation on which strong, vibrant and dynamic

Nation is built. The values children are exposed to in their formative years get inculcated
in their young minds and serve as a force multiplier that has the capacity to transform the
future of a Nation. Quality consciousness, based on Standardization is one of the pillars of
accelerated economic development and priming students to appreciate the significance of
quality, Standards and Standardization can serve as a catalyst to improve social awareness
on these subjects.

1.1.2 Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) has decided to launch a new initiative "Learning Science

via Standards" for the students and teachers of the schools having Standards Clubs.
"Learning Science via Standards" is a project-based approach to using standards as a
vehicle of promoting quality consciousness.

1.1.3 The initiative will help in creating a more conducive environment for acceptance of

standards by demonstrating their relationship with scientific concepts, Principles and Laws
of Science.

13.2
Objectives

a) To create awareness on Standards and promote quality consciousness among students and

teachers.
b) To inculcate standards culture and to sensitize the students and teachers on impact of

standards on life and society.
c) To create a more conducive environment for acceptance of standards by demonstrating

their relationship with scientific concepts, Principles and Laws of Science.

13.3
Course Structure

a) Concepts of Quality and Standardization
b) Types of Standardization and Standards
c) Benefits of Standardization
d) Standardization at National & International Levels
e) Scope of the standard and a comparative analysis of the advantages and disadvantages of

compliance with and without the standard.
f) Elaboration of the concepts and laws the important features of the standard are based on.
g) Classroom Activity - group work to identify the relevant concept and law, and present

the findings, followed by discussion on those concepts/laws and how they are applied to
the standard.
h) Classroom activity to discuss the possible ways to make the standard more environment

friendly, need for reducing the carbon footprint and circular economy, SDGs etc.

13.4
Target Participants
School Students and Teachers

13.5
Frequency and Batch Size
No of Programmes in a year - 1, duration of 6 days ( for students ) and 2 days ( for teachers) -with
batch size 20 (Min) - 40 (Max) participants

13.6
Content Development Committee
The Content development Committee shall constitute of following members.

a) 02 Representative from TNMD
b) 01 Representative from NITS

13.7
Resource Person / Faculty

a) Competent personnel from BIS BOs.

13.8
Training Methodology

a) Interactive Classroom Sessions.
b) Workshops, Case Studies and Activities.

13.9
Continual Improvement
The Coordination Committee shall evaluate each phase of the trainings through feedbacks,
assessments, follow ups, etc, so as to make sure it has achieved its aim in terms of subsequent work
performance and recommend necessary amendments for continual improvement of the training
solutions.

13.10 Communication - Promotion & Marketing
E-Mails and Letters to Schools, Education Boards & Education

14 Lead Auditor Course On Quality Management System (IS/ISO 9001:2015)

14.1 Introduction

14.1.1 ISO 9001:2015 specifies requirements for a quality management system when an

organization needs to demonstrate its ability to consistently provide products and
services that meet customer and applicable statutory and regulatory requirements and
aims to enhance customer satisfaction through the effective application of the system,
including processes for improvement of the system and the assurance of conformity to
customer and applicable statutory and regulatory requirements.

14.1.2 All the requirements of ISO 9001:2015 are generic and are intended to be applicable to

any organization, regardless of its type or size, or the products and services it provides.

14.2 Objectives

a) Appreciate the purpose and benefits of a Quality Management System.
b) Understand the requirements of ISO 9001:2015 in the context of an audit.
c) Understanding QMS Principles in the context of the Risk Assessment and the requirements

of various acts and rules applicable in the industry sector.
d) Learn the role of an Auditor to plan, conduct, report and follow up on Quality Management

System Audit in accordance with ISO 19011:2018.
e) To effectively perform a full 1st, 2nd or 3rd party assessment of Quality Management

Systems and generate audit findings.
f) To assess the overall conformity (or otherwise) of a QMS to the audit criteria.

14.3
Course Structure

a) Structure and Overview of IS/ISO 9001:2015
b) ISO 9001:2015 requirements.
c) PDCA / Process approach/ Quality Management principles /Risk-based thinking.
d) Audit definition and principles.
e) Planning, preparation, tools, and techniques of audit.
f) Post audit activities including corrective actions.
g) Exercises / Workshops.
h) Examination

14.4
Target Participants

a) Professionals wanting to gain comprehensive knowledge about Quality Management

System.
b) Personnel responsible for implementing QMS.
c) Expert advisors/ Consultants for Quality Management Systems.
d) Auditors / Internal Auditors.
e) BIS Officers who will be assigned audits for Management System Certification

14.5
Frequency and Batch Size

No of Programmes in a year - 4, duration of 5 days with batch size 10 (Min) - 20 (Max) participants

14.6
Content Development Committee

These Courses are done with alliance of Service Providers and Content are developed by them.

14.7
Resource Person / Faculty

Competent personnel from Industry or Service Provider

14.8
Training Methodology

a) Interactive Classroom Sessions.

b) Workshops, case studies and auditing exercises.

14.9
Continual Improvement

The Coordination Committee shall evaluate each phase of the trainings through feedbacks,
assessments, follow ups, etc, so as to make sure it has achieved its aim in terms of subsequent work
performance and recommend necessary amendments for continual improvement of the training
solutions.

14.10 Communication - Promotion & Marketing

Mail to MSCOs, previous participating organisations, contact to stakeholders

Lead Auditor Course On Food Safety Management System (IS/ISO 22000:2018)

15.1 Introduction

ISO 22000:2018 specifies requirements for a Food Safety Management System where an
organization in the food chain needs to demonstrate its ability to control food safety hazards in
order to ensure that food is safe at the time of human consumption. It is applicable to all
organizations, regardless of size, which are involved in any aspect of the food chain and want to
implement systems that consistently provide safe products. The means of meeting any
requirements of ISO 22000 can be accomplished through the use of internal and / or external
resources.

15.2 Objectives

a) Appreciate the purpose and benefits of a Food Safety Management System.
b) Understand the requirements of ISO 22000:2018 in the context of an audit.
c) Understanding FSMS Principles in the context of the Risk Assessment and the

requirements of various acts and rules applicable in the industry sector.
d) Learn the role of an Auditor to plan, conduct, report and follow up on Food Safety

Management System Audit in accordance with ISO 19011:2018.
e) To effectively perform a full 1st. 2nd or 3rd party assessment of Food Safety Management

Systems and generate audit findings.
f) To assess the overall conformity (or otherwise) of a FSMS to the audit criteria.

15.3 Course Structure

a) Structure and Overview of IS/ISO 22000:2018
b) ISO 22000:2018 requirements.
c) PDCA / Process approach/ Food Safety Management principles /Risk-based thinking.
d) Audit definition and principles.
e) Planning, preparation, tools, and techniques of audit.
f) Post audit activities including corrective actions.
g) Exercises / Workshops.
h) Examination

15.4 Target Participants

a) Professionals wanting to gain comprehensive knowledge about Food Safety Management

System.
b) Personnel responsible for implementing FSMS.
c) Expert advisors/ Consultants for Food Safety Management Systems.
d) Auditors / Internal Auditors.
e) BIS Officers who will be assigned audits for Management System Certification

15.5 Frequency and Batch Size

No of Programmes in a year - 4, duration of 5 days with batch size 10 (Min) - 20 (Max) participants

15.6 Content Development Committee

The Content development Committee shall constitute of members from Industry & Service
Providers.

15.7 Resource Person / Faculty

These Courses are done with alliance of Service Providers and Content are developed by them

15.8 Training Methodology

a) Interactive Classroom Sessions.
b) Workshops, case studies and auditing exercises

15.9 Continual Improvement

The Coordination Committee shall evaluate each phase of the trainings through feedbacks,
assessments, follow ups, etc, so as to make sure it has achieved its aim in terms of subsequent work
performance and recommend necessary amendments for continual improvement of the training
solutions.

15.10 Communication - Promotion & Marketing

Mail to MSCOs, previous participating organisations, contact to stakeholders

Lead Auditor Course On Energy Management System (IS/ISO 50001:2018)

16.1 Introduction

ISO 50001 specifies the energy management system (EnMS) requirements for an organization.
Successful implementation of an EnMS supports a culture of energy performance improvement
that depends upon commitment from all levels of the organization, especially top management. In
many instances, this involves cultural changes within an organization. The aim of ISO 50001 is to
enable organizations to establish the systems and processes necessary to continually improve
energy performance, including energy efficiency, energy use and energy consumption

16.2 Learning Objectives

a) Appreciate the purpose and benefits of an Energy Management System.
b) Understand the requirements of ISO 50001:2018 in the context of an audit.
c) Summarize the role of law in energy conservation and the requirements of various acts and

rules applicable in the industry sector.
d) Learn the role of an Auditor to plan, conduct, report and follow up on Energy Management

System Audit in accordance with ISO 19011:2018.
e) To effectively perform a full 1st. 2nd or 3rd party assessment of Energy Management

Systems and generate audit findings.
f) To assess the overall conformity (or otherwise) of a EnMS to the audit criteria.

16.3 Course Structure

a) Structure and Overview of IS/ISO 50001:2018
b) ISO 50001:2018 requirements.
c) Interrelationship between Management Responsibility, Energy Policy, Energy Planning,

Checking Performance, Management Review and Continual Improvement.
d) Audit definition and principles.
e) Planning, preparation, tools, and techniques of audit.
f) Post audit activities including corrective actions.
g) Exercises / Workshops.
h) Examination

16.4 Target Participants

a) Professionals wanting to gain comprehensive knowledge about Energy Management

System.
b) Personnel responsible for implementing EnMS.
c) Expert advisors/ Consultants for Energy Management Systems.
d) Auditors / Internal Auditors.
e) BIS Officers who will be assigned audits for Management System Certification

16.5 Frequency and Batch Size

No of Programmes in a year - 2, duration of 5days with batch size 10 (Min) - 20 (Max) participants

16.6 Content Development Committee

These Courses are done with alliance of Service Providers and Content are developed by them

16.7 Resource Person / Faculty

Competent personnel from Industry or Service Provider

16.8 Training Methodology

a)
Interactive Classroom Sessions.
b)
Workshops, case studies and auditing exercises

16.9 Continual Improvement

The Coordination Committee shall evaluate each phase of the trainings through feedbacks,
assessments, follow ups, etc, so as to make sure it has achieved its aim in terms of subsequent work
performance and recommend necessary amendments for continual improvement of the training
solutions.

16.10 Communication - Promotion & Marketing

Mail to MSCOs, previous participating organisations, contact to stakeholders

Lead Auditor Course On Environmental Management System (IS/ISO 14001:2015)

17.1 Introduction

17.1.1 ISO 14001:2015 specifies the requirements for an environmental management system that
an organization can use to enhance its environmental performance. ISO 14001:2015 is intended
for use by an organization seeking to manage its environmental responsibilities in a systematic
manner that contributes to the environmental pillar of sustainability.

17.1.2 ISO 14001:2015 helps an organization achieve the intended outcomes of its environmental
management system, which provide value for the environment, the organization itself and
interested parties. Consistent with the organization's environmental policy, the intended outcomes
of an environmental management system include:

a) enhancement of environmental performance;
b) fulfilment of compliance obligations;
c) achievement of environmental objectives.

17.1.3 ISO 14001:2015 is applicable to any organization, regardless of size, type and nature, and
applies to the environmental aspects of its activities, products and services that the organization
determines it can either control or influence considering a life cycle perspective. ISO 14001:2015
does not state specific environmental performance criteria.

17.1.4 ISO 14001:2015 can be used in whole or in part to systematically improve environmental
management. Claims of conformity to ISO 14001:2015, however, are not acceptable unless all its
requirements are incorporated into an organization's environmental management system and
fulfilled without exclusion.

17.2 Objectives

a) Appreciate the purpose and benefits of an Environmental Management System.
b) Understand the requirements of ISO 14001:2015 in the context of an audit.
c) Understanding EMS Principles in the context of the Risk Assessment and the requirements

of various acts and rules applicable in the industry sector.
d) Learn the role of an Auditor to plan, conduct, report and follow up on Environmental

Management System Audit in accordance with ISO 19011:2018.
e) To effectively perform a full 1st, 2nd or 3rd party assessment of Environmental

Management Systems and generate audit findings.
f) To assess the overall conformity (or otherwise) of a EMS to the audit criteria.

17.3 Course Structure

a) Structure and Overview of IS/ISO 14001:2015
b) ISO 14001:2015 requirements.
c) PDCA / Process approach/ Environmental Management principles /Risk-based thinking.
d) Audit definition and principles.
e) Planning, preparation, tools, and techniques of audit.

f) Post audit activities including corrective actions.
g) Exercises / Workshops.
h) Examination

17.4 Target Participants

a) Professionals wanting to gain comprehensive knowledge about Environmental

Management System.
b) Personnel responsible for implementing EMS.
c) Expert advisors/ Consultants for Environmental Management Systems.
d) Auditors / Internal Auditors.
e) BIS Officers who will be assigned audits for Management System Certification

17.5 Frequency and Batch Size

No of Programmes in a year - 4, duration of 5 days with batch size 10 (Min) - 20 (Max) participants

17.6 Content Development Committee

These Courses are done with alliance of Service Providers and Content are developed by them

17.7 Resource Person / Faculty

Competent personnel from Industry or Service Provider

17.8 Training Methodology

a) Interactive Classroom Sessions.
b) Workshops, case studies and auditing exercises

17.9 Continual Improvement

The Coordination Committee shall evaluate each phase of the trainings through feedbacks,
assessments, follow ups, etc, so as to make sure it has achieved its aim in terms of subsequent work
performance and recommend necessary amendments for continual improvement of the training
solutions.

17.10 Communication - Promotion & Marketing

Mail to MSCOs, previous participating organisations, contact to stakeholders

Lead Auditor Course on Anti Bribery Management System (IS/ISO 37001:2016)

18.1Introduction

18.1.1 Anti-Bribery Management Systems: ISO 37001:2016 specifies requirements and provides

guidance for establishing, implementing, maintaining, reviewing and improving an antibribery management system. The system can be stand-alone or can be integrated into an
overall management system. ISO 37001:2016 addresses the following in relation to the
organization's activities:

a) bribery in the public, private and not-for-profit sectors;
b) bribery by the organization;
c) bribery by the organization's personnel acting on the organization's behalf or for its benefit;
d) bribery by the organization's business associates acting on the organization's behalf or for

its benefit;
e) bribery of the organization;
f) bribery of the organization's personnel in relation to the organization's activities;
g) bribery of the organization's business associates in relation to the organization's activities;
h) direct and indirect bribery (e.g. a bribe offered or accepted through or by a third party).

18.2 Objectives

a) Understand the operations of an Anti-bribery Management System (ABMS) based on ISO

b) Acknowledge the correlation between ISO 37001 and other standards and regulatory

frameworks
c) Understand an auditor's role to: plan, lead and follow-up on a management system audit in

accordance with ISO 19011
d) Learn how to lead an audit and audit team h Learn how to interpret the requirements of

ISO 37001 in the context of an ABMS audit
e) Acquire the competencies of an auditor to: plan an audit, lead an audit, draft reports, and

follow-up on an audit in compliance with ISO 19011

18.3 Course Structure

a) Structure and Overview of IS/ISO 37001:2016
b) ISO 37001:2016 requirements.
c) Anti-Bribery Management Concepts and Principles
d) Audit definition and principles.
e) Planning, preparation, tools, and techniques of audit.
f) Post audit activities including corrective actions.
g) Exercises / Workshops.
h) Examination

18.4 Target Participants

a) Auditors seeking to perform and lead Anti-bribery Management System (ABMS)

certification audits
b) Managers or consultants seeking to master an Anti-bribery Management System audit

process
c) Individuals responsible for maintaining conformance with ABMS requirements
d) Technical experts seeking to prepare for an Anti-bribery Management System audit
e) Expert advisors in Anti-bribery Management
f) BIS Officers who will be assigned audits for Management System Certification

18.5 Frequency and Batch Size

No of Programmes in a year - 3, duration of 5days with batch size 10 (Min) - 20 (Max) participants

18.6 Content Development Committee

These Courses are done with alliance of Service Providers and Content are developed by them

18.7 Resource Person / Faculty

Competent personnel from Industry or Service Provider

18.8 Training Methodology

c) Interactive Classroom Sessions.
d) Workshops, case studies and auditing exercises

18.9 Continual Improvement

The Coordination Committee shall evaluate each phase of the trainings through feedbacks,
assessments, follow ups, etc, so as to make sure it has achieved its aim in terms of subsequent work
performance and recommend necessary amendments for continual improvement of the training
solutions.

18.10 Communication - Promotion & Marketing

Mail to MSCOs, previous participating organisations, contact to stakeholders

Lead Auditor Course on Occupational Health & Safety Management System (IS/ISO
45001:2018)

19.1 Introduction

19.1.1 ISO 45001:2018 specifies requirements for an occupational health and safety (OH&S)

management system, and gives guidance for its use, to enable organizations to provide safe
and healthy workplaces by preventing work-related injury and ill health, as well as by
proactively improving its OH&S performance.

19.1.2 ISO 45001:2018 is applicable to any organization that wishes to establish, implement and

maintain an OH&S management system to improve occupational health and safety,
eliminate hazards and minimize OH&S risks (including system deficiencies), take
advantage of OH&S opportunities, and address OH&S management system
nonconformities associated with its activities.

19.1.3 ISO 45001:2018 helps an organization to achieve the intended outcomes of its OH&S

management system. Consistent with the organization's OH&S policy, the intended
outcomes of an OH&S management system include:

a) continual improvement of OH&S performance;
b) fulfilment of legal requirements and other requirements;
c) achievement of OH&S objectives.

19.1.4 ISO 45001:2018 is applicable to any organization regardless of its size, type and activities.

It is applicable to the OH&S risks under the organization's control, taking into account
factors such as the context in which the organization operates and the needs and
expectations of its workers and other interested parties.

19.2 Objectives

a) Appreciate the purpose and benefits of Occupational Health & Safety Management

System.
b) Understand the requirements of IS/ISO 45001:2018 in the context of an audit.
c) Understanding OHSMS Principles in the context of the Risk Assessment and the

requirements of various acts and rules applicable in the industry sector.
d) Learn the role of an Auditor to plan, conduct, report, and follow up on Occupational Health

& Safety management system audit in accordance with ISO 19011:2018.
e) To effectively perform a full 1st, 2nd or 3rd party assessment of the Management System

and generate audit findings.
f) To assess the overall conformity (or otherwise) of an OHSMS to the audit criteria.

19.3 Course Structure

a) Structure and Overview of IS/ISO 45001:2018

b) IS/ISO 45001:2018 requirements
c) PDCA / Process approach / Occupational Health & Safety Management principles/ Riskbased thinking
d) Audit definition and principles.
e) Planning, preparation, tools, and techniques of audit.
f) Post audit activities including corrective actions.
g) Exercises/Workshops
h) Examination

19.4 Target Participants

a) Auditors seeking to perform and lead Occupational Health & Safety Management System

certification audits
b) Managers or consultants seeking to master an Occupational Health & Safety Management

System audit process
c) Individuals responsible for maintaining conformance with OHSMS requirements
d) Technical experts seeking to prepare for an OHSMS audit
e) Expert advisors in Anti-bribery Management
f) BIS Officers who will be assigned audits for Management System Certification

19.5 Frequency and Batch Size

No of Programmes in a year - 2, duration of 5days with batch size 10 (Min) - 20 (Max) participants

19.6 Content Development Committee

These Courses are done with alliance of Service Providers and Content are developed by them.

19.7 Resource Person / Faculty

Competent personnel from Industry or Service Provider

19.8 Training Methodology

a. Interactive Classroom Sessions.
b. Workshops, case studies and auditing exercises

19.9 Continual Improvement

The Coordination Committee shall evaluate each phase of the trainings through feedbacks,
assessments, follow ups, etc, so as to make sure it has achieved its aim in terms of subsequent work
performance and recommend necessary amendments for continual improvement of the training
solutions.

19.10 Communication - Promotion & Marketing

Mail to MSCOs, previous participating organisations, contact to stakeholders

DOCUMENTATION AND INTERNAL AUDIT COURSE ON SERVICE QUALITY
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (IS 15700:2018)

20.1 Introduction

20.1.1 IS 15700:2018 specifies requirements for a quality management system where a public

service organization:
a) needs to demonstrate its ability to consistently provide effective and efficient service

that meets customer and applicable legal, statutory and regulatory requirements;
b) aims to enhance customer satisfaction; and
c) aims to continually improve its service and service delivery process.

20.2 Learning Objectives

a) Describe the purpose of a Quality Management System as per IS 15700.
b) Explain the structure, purpose, content of IS 15700:2005, and its interrelationship with

ISO 9000, ISO 10002:2004, and ISO 19011.
c) Understand the international conformance systems and its benefits, certification/

accreditation and the process of certification.
d) Interpret the requirements of IS 15700 in the context of a Public Service Organization.
e) Describe the roles and responsibilities of a Nodal Officer as per IS 15700.
f) Steps Involved in IS 15700:2005 Implementation, Certification and maintenance
g) To Underline how implementation of IS 15700:2005 can help implement e-Governance

Projects more successfully

20.3 Course Structure

a) Structure and Overview of IS 15700:2018
b) IS 15700:2018 requirements.
c) PDCA / Process approach/ Quality Management principles /Risk-based thinking.
d) Service Delivery Standard and QM Principles
e) Requirements for Service Quality by Public Service Organizations (IS 15700) -

Elements
f) Complaints Handling Process
g) Audit definition and principles.
h) Planning, preparation, tools, and techniques of audit.
i) Post audit activities including corrective actions.
j) Exercises / Workshops.
k) Examination

20.4 Target Participants

a) Professionals from various Public Service Organization(s), who wish to provide an

effective and efficient service quality.

b) Public Service Organizations including all those central/ state govt. departments, public

utility service providers, regulatory bodies, banks, public transport providers, large public
hospitals and schools providing services to the public at large and/or whose activities
influence public interest.
c) Public Service Organizations intended to support those who are either implementing IS

15700:2005 or are providing auditing services as auditors/ certification body.
d) BIS Officers who will be assigned audits for Management System Certification

20.5 Frequency and Batch Size

No of Programmes in a year -2, duration of 2 days with batch size 10 (Min) - 20 (Max) participants

20.6 Content Development Committee

2 members from MSCD and 1 member from NITS

20.7 Resource Person / Faculty

Competent personnel from BIS, Industry or Service Provider

20.8 Training Methodology

a) Interactive Classroom Sessions.
b) Workshops, case studies and auditing exercises

20.9 Continual Improvement

The Coordination Committee shall evaluate each phase of the trainings through feedbacks,
assessments, follow ups, etc, so as to make sure it has achieved its aim in terms of subsequent work
performance and recommend necessary amendments for continual improvement of the training
solutions.

20.10 Communication - Promotion & Marketing

Mail to MSCOs, previous participating organisations, Public Service Organizations, Contact to
stakeholders

Training Programme on "Laboratory Quality Management System And Internal Audit
as per IS/ISO/IEC 17025:2017"

21.1Introduction

21.1.1 This Indian Standard (Second Revision) which is identical with ISO/IEC 17025 : 2017
'General requirements for the competence of testing and calibration laboratories' issued by the
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the International Eletrotechnical
Commission (IEC) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on recommendation of the
CASCO National Mirror Committee and approval of the Management and Systems Division
Council.

21.1.2 IS/ISO/IEC 17025: 2017 has been developed with the objective of promoting confidence
in the operation of laboratories and contains requirements for laboratories to enable them to
demonstrate they operate competently, and are able to generate valid results. Laboratories that
conform to this document will also operate generally in accordance with the principles of ISO
9001.

21.2 Objectives

a) Appreciate the purpose and benefits of a Laboratory Quality Management System.
b) Understand the requirements of IS/ISO/IEC 17025:2017 in the context of an audit.
c) Understanding LQMS Principles in the context of the Risk Assessment and the

requirements of various acts and rules applicable in the industry sector.
d) Learn the role of an Auditor to plan, conduct, report and follow up on Laboratory Quality

Management System Audit in accordance with ISO 19011:2018.
e) To effectively perform a full 1st, 2nd or 3rd party assessment of Quality Management

Systems and generate audit findings.
f) To assess the overall conformity (or otherwise) of a QMS to the audit criteria.

21.3 Course Structure

a) Structure and Overview of IS/ISO/IEC 17025:2017
b) IS/ISO/IEC 17025:2017 requirements.
c) PDCA / Process approach/ Quality Management principles /Risk-based thinking.
d) Audit definition and principles.
e) Planning, preparation, tools, and techniques of audit.
f) Post audit activities including corrective actions.
g) Exercises / Workshops.

21.4 Target Participants

a) Laboratory Personnel/ Auditors /Internal Auditors wanting to gain comprehensive

knowledge about Laboratory Quality Management System.
b) Personnel responsible for implementing LQMS.
c) Expert advisors/ Consultants for Quality Management Systems.

21.5 Frequency and Batch Size

No of Programmes in a year 16, duration of 4 days with batch size 10 (Min) - 30 (Max) participants

21.6 Content Development Committee

Expert from NABL, Expert Faculty from BIS/ Ex-BIS, MS of MSD-14/ HMSD, and Course
Coordinator (NITS)

21.7 Resource Person / Faculty

Competent personnel from NABL, Expert Faculty (Ex-BIS), BIS Scientific Officer having
Laboratory Experiences.

21.8 Training Methodology

a) Interactive Classroom Sessions.
b) Workshops, Exercises, Case studies and auditing exercises.
c) Soft /Hard copy of all training material.

21.9 Continual Improvement

The Coordination Committee shall evaluate each phase of the trainings through feedbacks,
assessments, follow ups, etc, so as to make sure it has achieved its aim in terms of subsequent work
performance and recommend necessary amendments for continual improvement of the training
solutions.

21.10 Communication - Promotion & Marketing

Mail to previous participating organisations, contact to stakeholders

Training Programme On "Medical Laboratories Quality Systems And Internal Audit as
per IS/ISO 15189:2022"

22.1
Introduction

IS/ISO
:
(Fourth
edition)
Medical
laboratories
-
Requirements
contains requirements for the medical laboratory to plan and implement actions to address risks
and opportunities for improvement. Benefits of this approach include: increasing the effectiveness
of the management system, decreasing probability of invalid results, and reducing
potential harm to patients, laboratory personnel, the public and the environment.
The requirements for risk management are aligned with the principles of ISO 22367.
The requirements for laboratory safety are aligned with the principles of ISO 15190.
The requirements for sample collection and transport are aligned with ISO 20658.1)
This document contains the requirements for point-of-care testing (POCT) and supersedes ISO
22870, which will be withdrawn upon publication of this document.

22.2
Objectives

a) Appreciate the purpose and benefits of a Medical Laboratories Quality System.
b) Understand the requirements of IS/ISO 15189:2022 in the context of an audit.
c) Understanding MLQMS Principles in the context of the Risk Assessment and the

requirements of various acts and rules applicable in the industry sector.
d) Learn the role of an Auditor to plan, conduct, report and follow up on MLQMS Audit in

accordance with ISO 19011:2018.
e) To effectively perform a full 1st, 2nd or 3rd party assessment of Medical Laboratories

Quality Systems and generate audit findings.
f) To assess the overall conformity of a MLQMS 15189 to the audit criteria.

22.3
Course Structure

a) Structure and Overview of IS/ISO 15189:2022
b) IS/ISO 15189:2022 requirements.
c) PDCA / Process approach/Risk-based thinking.
d) Audit definition and principles.
e) Planning, preparation, tools, and techniques of audit.
f) Post audit activities including corrective actions.
g) Exercises / Workshops.

22.4
Target Participants

a) Professionals wanting to gain comprehensive knowledge about Medical Laboratories

Quality System as per ISO 15189.
b) Personnel responsible for implementing MLQMS 15189.
c) Person related to Medical Laboratory Services, Patient care, Clinical work, Clinical

physiolog, Medical imaging and Medical physics etc.

d) Senior Medical Laboratory Personnel involved in the management and establishment of

Medical Laboratory Quality Systems and internal audit programmes for their laboratories
as required by NABL Criteria & International Standard ISO 15189: 2022.
e) Expert advisors/ Consultants /Auditors / Internal Auditors.

22.5
Frequency and Batch Size

No of Programmes in a year -2, duration of 4 days with batch size 10 (Min) - 25(Max) participants

22.6
Content Development Committee

Expert from NABL, Expert Faculty for 15189, MS of MHD-14/ HMHD, and Course Coordinator
(NITS)

22.7
Resource Person / Faculty

Competent personnel from NABL, Expert Faculty for 15189, Expert Faculty having Medical
Laboratory/ Hospital Experiences.

22.8
Training Methodology

a) Interactive Classroom Sessions.
b) Workshops, Exercises, Case studies and auditing exercises.
c) Soft /Hard copy of all training material.

22.9
Continual Improvement

The Coordination Committee shall evaluate each phase of the trainings through feedbacks,
assessments, follow ups, etc, so as to make sure it has achieved its aim in terms of subsequent work
performance and recommend necessary amendments for continual improvement of the training
solutions.

22.10 Communication - Promotion & Marketing

Mail to previous participating organisations, contact to stakeholders/ target Participants.

TRAINING PROGRAMME ON "MEASUREMENT UNCERTAINTY"

23.1 Introduction

23.1.1 Measurement uncertainty is defined as a "parameter, associated with the result of a

measurement that characterizes the dispersion of the values that could reasonably be
attributed to the measurand" (JCGM, 2008). Uncertainty is a quantification of the doubt
about the measurement result. Whenever possible we try to correct for any known errors:
for example, by applying corrections from calibration certificates. But any error whose
value we do not know is a source of uncertainty.

23.1.2 As per clause 7.8.3.1 c) of IS/ISO/IEC 17025:2017 where applicable, the measurement

uncertainty presented in the same unit as that of the measurand or in a term relative to the
measurand (e.g. percent) when:
a) it is relevant to the validity or application of the test results;
b) a customer's instruction so requires, or
c) the measurement uncertainty affects conformity to a specification limit;

23.2 Objectives

a) Clear understanding of Basic Statistical Concepts.
b) Know the factors responsible for measurement uncertainties (MU)
c) Identify these factors for your testing/ calibration.
d) Carry out the statistical calculations for evaluation of the MU
e) Formulate effectively Quality Control Plan for the laboratory measurements utilizing the

uncertainty of Measurements.
f) Understanding a testing activity in terms of mathematical model, to be able to identify the

significant control factors for accuracy or validity of results.

23.3 Course Structure

a) Overview and introduction of measurement uncertainty.
b) Basics of statistical calculations and components of uncertainty.
c) Step by step approach to uncertainty estimation.
d) Estimating different types of uncertainties.
e) Measurement uncertainty in calibration.
f) Concepts of combined and expanded uncertainty.
g) Exercises / Workshops.

23.4 Target Participants

a) Technical Heads of testing and calibration laboratory, including microbiological testing.
b) Young engineers / scientists working in testing field and wants to enhance their career,

with a formal added professional qualification and skill up-gradation.
c) An individual working as consultant in ISO/IEC 17025 field.
d) Expert advisors/ Consultants /Auditors /Internal Auditors for LQMS/ MLQMS.

23.5 Frequency and Batch Size

No of Programmes in a year 3, duration of 2 days with batch size 10 (Min) - 25(Max) participants

23.6 Content Development Committee

Expert from NABL/NPL, Expert Faculty for Chemical, Electrical, Mechanical and
Microbiological, having relevant Experiences from BIS /Ex-BIS and Course Coordinator (NITS)

23.7 Resource Person / Faculty

Competent personnel from NABL, Expert Faculty for Chemical, Electrical, Mechanical and
Microbiological, having relevant Experiences.

23.8 Training Methodology

a) Interactive Classroom Sessions.
b) Workshops, Exercises, Case studies.
c) Soft /Hard copy of all training material.

23.9 Continual Improvement

The Coordination Committee shall evaluate each phase of the trainings through feedbacks,
assessments, follow ups, etc, so as to make sure it has achieved its aim in terms of subsequent work
performance and recommend necessary amendments for continual improvement of the training
solutions.

23.10 Communication - Promotion & Marketing

Mail to previous participating organisations, contact to stakeholders/ target Participants.

.

TRAINING
PROGRAMME
ON
"INTER
LABORATORY
COMPARISON,
PROFICIENCY TESTING AND EVALUATION OF SCORES (ILC/PT)"

24.1 Introduction

24.1.1 Proficiency Testing is one of the important tools to determine the technical competence of

the Testing, Calibration and Medical Testing laboratories. According to ISO/IEC 17025 a
laboratory shall have quality control procedures for monitoring the validity of tests and
calibrations undertaken. This monitoring may include the participation in interlaboratory
comparisons or proficiency testing programs. Other means may include the regular use of
reference materials, or replicate tests or calibrations using the same or different methods.
By these mechanisms a laboratory can provide evidence of its competence to its clients,
interested parties and the accreditation body.

24.1.2 ISO 15189 also requires that medical laboratories seek confirmation for confidence in their

results through participation in suitable inter laboratory comparisons.

24.1.3 The laboratory shall monitor its performance by comparison with results of other

laboratories, where available and appropriate. This monitoring shall be planned and
reviewed and shall include, but not be limited to, either or both of the following:

a) participation in proficiency testing ;Note: ISO/IEC 17043 contains additional
information on proficiency tests and proficiency testing providers. Proficiency testing
providers that meet the requirements of ISO/IEC17043 are considered to be competent.

b) participation in interlaboratory comparisons other than proficiency testing.

24.1.4 Interlaboratory Comparison is organization, performance and evaluation of measurements

or tests on the same or similar items by two or more laboratories in accordance with
predetermined
conditions. Proficiency testing means evaluation of participant performance against preestablished criteria by means of interlaboratory comparisons.Outlier is observation in a set
of
data
that
appears
to
be
inconsistent
with
the
remainder
of
that
set

24.2 Objectives

a) Know the requirements of ILC/PT
b) Identify types of ILC/PT required for your testing/calibration.
c) Plan the PT/ ILC required for your organization.
d) Plan for statistical requirements of PT/ ILC.
e) Conducting the PT/ ILC program.
f) Carry out the statistical calculations for evaluation of the scores (z score).
g) Know how to detect outliers in the results.
h) Homogenization and stabilization of samples prepared for PT.

24.3 Course Structure

a) Inter lab comparison vs Proficiency Testing.
b) Proficiency Testing Schemes.
c) Evaluation of Proficiency testing results.
d) Evaluation of Z Scores.
e) ISO/IEC 17025 Requirements for Proficiency Testing.
f) ILAC Requirements for Proficiency Testing.

24.4 Target Participants

a) Personnel responsible for implementing LQMS/MLQMS.
b) Laboratory/Testing Personnel/Quality Managers/Technical Managers.
c) Expert advisors/Consultants
d) Auditors / Internal Auditors.

24.5 Frequency and Batch Size

No of Programmes in a year -3, duration of 2 days with batch size 10 (Min) - 25(Max) participants

24.6 Content Development Committee

Expert from NABL/NPL, Expert Faculty for Chemical, Electrical, Mechanical and
Microbiological, having relevant Experiences from BIS /Ex-BIS and Course Coordinator (NITS)

24.7 Resource Person / Faculty

Competent personnel from NABL, Expert Faculty for Chemical, Electrical, Mechanical and
Microbiological, having relevant Experiences.

24.8 Training Methodology

d) Interactive Classroom Sessions.
e) Workshops, Exercises, Case studies.
f) Soft /Hard copy of all training material.

24.9 Continual Improvement

The Coordination Committee shall evaluate each phase of the trainings through feedbacks,
assessments, follow ups, etc, so as to make sure it has achieved its aim in terms of subsequent work
performance and recommend necessary amendments for continual improvement of the training
solutions.

24.10 Communication - Promotion & Marketing

Mail to previous participating organisations, contact to stakeholders/ target Participants.

International Training Programmes for Developing Countries

25.1 Introduction

25.1.1 NITS is one of the training institutes identified by Ministry of External Affairs, Govt. of

India under Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) and e-ITEC programmes,
for imparting trainings to participants from developing countries.

25.1.2 NITS has been conducting these programmes for developing countries of Asia, Africa,

Europe and Latin America every year since 1968. The following programmes are being
conducted for developing countries:

a) International Training Programme on Management Systems
b) International training Programme on Standardization and Quality Assurance
c) International Training Programme on Laboratory Quality Management Systems.

25.1.3 So far, 53 programmes have been conducted in the field of "Standardization and Quality

Assurance", 17 programme on "Management Systems" and 13 programmes on Laboratory
Quality Management Systems.

25.2 Objectives

25.2.1 International Training Programme on Management Systems

a) Understanding the fundamentals of management systems
b) Developing knowledge of various management system standards such as ISO 9001, ISO

14001, ISO 45001, and ISO 50001.
c) Understanding the requirements and implementation processes for different management

system standards.
d) Developing skills in auditing and reviewing management systems to ensure compliance

with standards.
e) Understanding the benefits of integrating management systems for improved

organizational performance.
f) Developing an understanding of the importance of continuous improvement in

management systems.
g) Developing effective communication and leadership skills for successful management

system implementation and maintenance.
h) Understanding the legal and regulatory requirements related to management systems.

25.2.2 International training Programme on Standardization and Quality Assurance

a) Understanding the fundamentals of standardization and its importance in different

industries and sectors.
b) Learning about the principles and methods of quality assurance, including statistical

process control and quality control.

c) Understanding the importance of customer satisfaction and customer-focused quality

management.
d) Developing an understanding of the different types of standards and their development

processes.
e) Understanding the role of national and international standardization bodies and their

processes for developing and maintaining standards.
f) Developing an understanding of the accreditation and certification process for management

systems and conformity assessment.

25.2.3 International Training Programme on Laboratory Quality Management Systems.

a) Understanding the principles and concepts of laboratory quality management systems and

their role in laboratory operations.
b) Developing an understanding of the requirements of international laboratory quality

management system standards, such as ISO/IEC 17025:2017.
c) Understanding the principles and practices of measurement traceability and uncertainty in

laboratory testing and calibration.
d) Developing skills in implementing and maintaining a laboratory quality management

system.
e) Learning about the accreditation and certification process for laboratory quality

management systems.
f) Developing skills in performing internal audits and assessments of laboratory quality

management systems.

25.3 Course Structure

25.3.1 International Training Programme on Management Systems

a) IS/ISO 900 Quality Management System (QMS)
b) IS/ ISO 14001 Environmental Management Systems (EMS)
c) IS 15700 Service Quality Management Systems (SQMS)
d) IS 16001 Social Accountability at Workplace (SAMS)
e) IS/ISO/IEC 17025 Laboratory Quality Management Systems (LQMS)
f)
IS/ISO 50001 Energy Management Systems (EnMS)
g) IS/ISO 4500 Occupational Hazards and Safety Management Systems (OHSMS)
h) IS/ISO 22000 Food Safety Management Systems
i)
ISO 26000 Social Responsibility
j)
IS/ISO/IEC 17021-1 International Accreditation systems,
k) IS/ISO 27001 Information Security Management Systems (ISMS)
l)
ISO 31000 Risk Management
m) ISO 13485 Medical devices, Quality management systems Requirements for Regulatory

purposes
n) Latest development at ISO/CASCO on Management Systems Standards, Guides & other

sectoral standards
o) ISO 21001 Educational Organisational Management System (EoMS)

p) Integrated Management System

25.3.2 International training Programme on Standardization and Quality Assurance

a) Standardization:- Fundamentals, Development, Responsibilities of Committee Secretaries,

International Standardization Scenario, Addressing sustainability in Standards.
b) Certification:- National Quality Infrastructure, Principles and Practices, Details of various

Conformity Schemes of BIS, Case Studies and also various Management Systems.
c) Testing:- Laboratory Quality Management Systems, Interlab Comparison, Measurement

Uncertainty, BIS lab Recognition Scheme.
d) Complaint Redressal System of BIS
e) Enforcement Activities
f) Standard Promotion Activities
g) Witnessing Technical Committee Meeting
h) Mock Committee Meetings for Formulation of Standards

25.3.3 International Training Programme on Laboratory Quality Management Systems.

a) Organization and Functions of National Standards Body (NSB)
b) An understanding of IS/ISO/IEC 17025:2017.
c) Developing and understanding on quality system documentation for the laboratory. It

would include training on developing quality manual and procedures etc.
d) Management equipment, calibration, traceability, measurement uncertainty,

environment, test methods,test items, safety, quality control, records and reports etc.
e) Techniques of conducting internal audit and reporting of the internal audit findings.
f) Management review and its contents.
g) Techniques for conducting Inter - Laboratory Comparison (ILC) / Proficiency Testing

(PT) & evaluation of the scores.
h) Understanding of Uncertainty in Measurement.

25.4 Target Participants

a)
Graduates in engineering or technology or in any discipline with professional experience
in the field of Standardization/Quality/Environment/Food Safety/Occupational Health &
Safety/Laboratory etc. from developing Countries.

b)
Officers of National Standards Bodies (NSB) of developing Countries

25.5 Frequency and Batch Size

No of Programmes in a year - as per the requirement, duration of 3-4 weeks with batch size
35(Max) participants

25.6 Content Development Committee

a) 01 Representative from CMDI
b) 01 Representative from SCMD
c) 01 Representative from LPPD

d) 01 Representative from MSCD
e) 01 Representative from NITS

25.7 Resource Person / Faculty

Competent personnel from BIS, Industry, academia, professional and experts.

25.8 Training Methodology

a) Interactive Classroom Sessions (offline programmes)/Interactive Online sessions (online

programmes)
b) Group exercises and discussions
c) Workshops and Case Studies.

26 Capsule Course on code of practices Standards

26.1 Introduction

Standards on code of practices provide a consistent set of guidelines, which helps ensure that
they are of a consistent quality across different organizations and industries. They play a critical
role in ensuring safety, quality, and efficiency in many industries, and can help to enhance
competitiveness and facilitate trade. These standards are being used by various stakeholders
like Govt Departments, regulatory authorities etc. Imparting training to stakeholders on
Standards on code of practices is essential to ensure compliance, enhance quality and safety,
improve productivity and efficiency, enhance reputation, and facilitate continuous
improvement. It is a critical component of any organization's quality management system and
can help to ensure long-term success and sustainability.

NITS conducts Capsule Courses on various code of Practices as per the requirement like
Storage , Food Safety , welding etc

26.2 Learning Objectives

a) Bridging the gap in the practice followed by the user and the specified code of practice.
b) Making participants skilled enough to be achieving quality as per prescribed standards.

26.3 Course Structure

a) Understanding the Indian Standards.
b) Discussion on practices followed and that specified
c) Exercises and Workshops on above topics.
d) Visit to industry

26.4
 Target participants
 Personnel of relevant industry engaged in that activity.

26.5
 Frequency and Batch Size
No of Programmes in a year - 4 per BO per year, duration of 2 days with batch size 20 (Min)
- 40 (Max) participants

26.6
 Content Development Committee

a) 01 Representative from concerned Technical deptt (nominated by SCMD )
b) 01 Representatives from Industry
c) 01 Representative from NITS

26.7
 Resource Person / Faculty
 Competent personnel from BIS and Industry.

26.8 Training Methodology
Classroom based with combination of lectures, presentations, videos, case studies and
interactive workshops.

26.9 Continual Improvement
The Coordination Committee shall evaluate each phase of the trainings through feedbacks,
assessments, follow ups, etc, so as to make sure it has achieved its aim in terms of subsequent
work performance and recommend necessary amendments for continual improvement of the
training solutions.

26.10 Communication - Promotion & Marketing
E-Mails and Letters to Licensees and Industry associations.

27 Sustainability Dialogues

27.1 Introduction A sustainable future means balancing the needs of the environmental, social
and economic systems, and organizations are increasingly expected to play a significant role in
achieving this. Transforming our world is the aim of the United Nations 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and its corresponding 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)

BIS is committed to leverage the power of Indian Standards to address the issues to achieve
Sustainable Development Goals. BIS, through Sustainability Dialogues, aims to foster the
stakeholder involvement to pool in their expertise and skills to address the issue of sustainability
through Indian standards

Sustainability Dialogues are organized at NITS with the stakeholders to facilitate mutual
shaping of the initiatives for Sustainable Development Goals by in-depth analysis, diagnosis
and reflections on the key building blocks of the Quality ecosystem.

27.2
 Learning Objectives
a) Enhancement of knowledge of technical committee members about sustainability
b) How the same can be achieved through Indian Standards.

27.3
 Course Structure
First hand knowledge from industry experts through lecture series about how sustainability is
addressed in the industry

27.4
 Target participants
BIS officers from standard formulation.

27.5
 Frequency and Batch Size
No of Programmes in a year - 12 , duration of 1 days with batch size 20 (Min) - 40 (Max)
participants

27.6
 Resource Person / Faculty
 Competent personnel from Industry and academia.

27.7
 Training Methodology
Classroom based with lectures, presentations, videos and interactive workshops.

27.8
 Continual Improvement
The Coordination Committee shall evaluate each phase of the trainings through feedbacks,
assessments, follow ups, etc, so as to make sure it has achieved its aim in terms of subsequent
work performance and recommend necessary revisions for continual improvement of the
training solutions.

27.9
 Communication - Promotion & Marketing
E-Mails and Letters to experts from academia , industry and Industry associations.

28 Training Programmes for Consumers and NGOs

28.1 Introduction

To excel and achieve the Organization goals of Quality ecosystem, it is very important to impart
training to consumers and NGOs. Providing training to consumers on standardization is aimed
at enabling them to get a personalized exposure to the various activities of BIS. This will
empower them to take advantages and benefits of BIS Schemes as applicable for them and
utilise the various features, as and when required, with familiarity and ease. It will lead to more
informed purchasing decisions, create a demand for quality and safety, and a more sustainable
future.

BIS has one of its goals to enhance and intensify its engagement with the important stakeholders
in the implementation of standards and been looking for partners, who can help it in this
important enterprise. Consumer Organizations and NGOs are seen as potent partners to give a
bigger reach broaden the ambit and coverage of the outreach activities of the organization and
Create a strong network of brand ambassadors for standards and quality. However the NGOs
themselves needs to be fully aware of BIS activities. Thus there is a need for training the NGOs .
Training NGOs on standardization can lead to increased awareness, increase in demand for
quality products , improved collaboration, and improved safety and quality.

28.2 Training Objectives

a) To impart updated knowledge on BIS activities

b) How the information can be disseminated amongst various stakeholders

28.3 Course Structure

a) Overview of BIS activities
b) BIS Act, Rules and Regulations
c) QCOs
d) BIS care app

28.4 Target participants

NGOs. Consumers ,

28.5 Frequency and Batch Size
No of Programmes in a year - 12 , duration of 1 days with batch size 20 (Min) - 40 (Max)
participants

28.6 Resource Person / Faculty
 Competent personnel from BIS

28.7 Training Methodology
Classroom based with lectures, presentations, videos and interactive workshops.

28.8 Continual Improvement
The Coordination Committee shall evaluate each phase of the trainings through feedbacks,
assessments, follow ups, etc, so as to make sure it has achieved its aim in terms of subsequent
work performance and recommend necessary revisions for continual improvement of the
training solutions.

Training Programme for BIS Scientific Officers

29.1 Induction Training Program for newly recruited Scientist -B officers

29.1.1 Introduction

The Bureau shall organize Induction training program for the newly recruited Scientist B. The
Bureau intends to train the new recruits into flag-bearers of quality who would inculcate and
propagate the quality consciousness among Industry.

For successful on-boarding of these recruits in the BIS family, they are provided training in the
various aspects of the activities and functions of BIS. In addition, to inculcate leadership and
managerial acumen, training in managerial & leadership skills is provided, as part of personality
development program, to better equip them to carry out their roles and responsibilities effectively.
Induction training programme is designed in a way that would help the young recruits imbibe these
traits.

29.1.2 Content Development Committee

a) Head (CMD)
b) Head (LPPD)
c) Head (SCMD)
d) Director (Administration Department)
e) Director (Finance Department)
f) 01 Representative from NITS

29.1.3 Resource Person / Faculty

Competent personnel from BIS, Industry and academia

29.1.4 Training Methodology

a) Interactive Classroom Sessions.
b) Workshops.

29.2 Refresher Training Courses

29.2.1 Introduction

The Bureau from time to time shall organize Refresher training courses for its scientific officers.
Refresher training shall include the specific requirements of periodic training as well as the new
developments in the functioning of the organization which includes but is not limited to interface
with Public, Consumer, Govt and other stakeholders , Administrative and Disciplinary Skills ,
Managerial Effectiveness , Enforcement and Legal Aspects , Business Development , Behavioral
Aspects, Personality Development, Communication Skills, Leadership Quality and Tactfulness ,
Global Commerce Activity , Future trends of BIS in the Country , Financial Aspects, GFR etc.
,Product specific exposure for understanding the subject

29.2.2 Content Development Committee

a) Head (CMD)
b) Head (LPPD)
c) Head (SCMD)
d) Director (Administration Department)
e) Director (Finance Department)
f) 01 Representative from NITS

29.2.3 Resource Person / Faculty

Competent personnel from Industry, academia, professional, overseas experts and BIS.

29.2.4 Training Methodology

a) Interactive Classroom Sessions.
b) Workshops.

29.3 Case studies development and writing of case studies

29.3.1 Introduction

Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) occupies a pivotal position in the quality ecosystem and has a
treasure trove of experiences in the area. Case Studies and Success Stories can serve as invaluable
assets in experience sharing establishing benefits of the various measures taken by the Bureau for
the improvement of the quality ecosystem. Case Studies on failed or deficient ventures provides
opportunities for improvement in the system by identifying and implementing the required
corrective measures. On the whole, Case Studies can serve as important training and promotional
tools that can help enrich the knowledge portal through experience sharing.

BIS is in the process of developing case studies on various activities of the Bureau. Necessary
training for the same has been imparted to one batch of officers of the Bureau for preparation of
Case Studies in collaboration with the Indian Institute of Lucknow.

29.3.2 Content Development Committee

a) 01 Representative from the Institute
b) 01 Representative from NITS

29.3.3 Resource Person / Faculty

Competent personnel from Academia , Industry, and BIS etc .

29.3.4 Training Methodology

a) Interactive Classroom Sessions.
b) Group exercises and discussions

c) Workshops and Case Studies.

29.4 Leadership Development Program for senior level BIS Scientific officers

29.4.1 Introduction

BIS endeavors to make learning one of the fundamental values of the organization for all its
employees through on-the-job trainings, focused training on aspects directly related to efficient
discharge of duties and also the general training for enabling overall personality development.

Keeping the objective in mind a Leadership Skills development program shall be organized for the
Senior level Scientific officers in partnership with the premier institutes including IITs/IIMs.

29.4.2 Content Development Committee

a) 01 Representative from the Institute
b) 01 Representative from NITS

29.4.3 Resource Person / Faculty

As per the institute who is carrying out the training

29.4.4 Training Methodology

a) Interactive Classroom Sessions.
b) Group exercises and discussions
c) Workshops and Case Studies.

29.5 Program on Project Management and Time Management

29.5.1 Introduction

With BIS constantly pioneering in various aspects of quality domain, Project management and
Time Management become the necessary skills to master for workplace success. Project
management has final deliverables that are constrained to a finite timescale and budget and time
being the most valuable resource, proper time management can help improve productivity and
value.

It is being planned to impart the training on these two particulars, to BIS officers, in collaboration
with the premier IIMs.

29.5.2 Content Development Committee

c) 01 Representative from the Management Institute
d) 01 Representative from NITS

29.5.3 Resource Person / Faculty

Competent personnel from BIS, Industry, academia, professional and overseas experts. From
management institute

29.6 Training Programme for BIS Administrative Cadre Officers

29.6.1 Introduction

The Bureau shall organize training program for the Administration and Finance Cadre officers.
The officials are trained in various aspects of the activities and functions of the Bureau.

29.6.2 Course Structure

Sl No.
Name of the

Course

Duration
Topics Covered

Induction training
Module (For
JSA/SSA/ASO/AD)

5 Days
• Overview of BIS Act & Regulations
• BIS (Terms & Conditions of Service

of Employee)
• Duties & Responsibility of the post
• Office Procedure
• File Management
• E-Office
• Noting Skills
• Practical on Drafting
• Record management
• Conduct Rules & Leave Rules
• Joining Time, Probation, etc.
• and Financial Rules & Service Rules

(FR & SR)

Refresher Training
Module (For
JSA/SSA/ASO/AD)

1 week
• Office Procedure
• Record Management
• Leave Rules
• CCS(CCA) Rules
• Conduct Rules
• Disciplinary proceedings
• E-procurement
• Financial Rules & Service Rules (FR

& SR)
• General Financial Rules (GFR)
• Right to Information (RTI)
Skill Upgradation
(HR) (For
JSA/SSA/ASO/AD)

1 week
• Recruitment
• Leave Rules
• Establishment Rules

Sl No.
Name of the

Course

Duration
Topics Covered

• Departmental Promotion Committee

(DPC)
• Reservation Rosters
• Promotion/MACP/NFG
• Seniority & Pay fixation
• GFR
• Service Book
• Handling of Disciplinary proceedings

(with case studies)
• Any other topic covered for

Establishment/HR
Skill Upgradation
(Finance and
Accounts) (For
JSA/SSA/ASO/AD)

1 week
• FR & SR
• GFR
• Goods & Services Tax (GST)
• Pension Rules & New Pension

Scheme (NPS)
• Travelling Allowance, House Rent

Allowance (HRA)
• Leave Travel Concession (LTC)
• TDS & ITR
• Processing of Payment/Bills
• GPF
• Budget
• Audit
• Any other topic covered for

Finance/Accounts
Skill Upgradation
(General
Administration)
(For
JSA/SSA/ASO/AD)

1 week
• Office Procedure
• Noting & Drafting Skills
• Purchase Procedure
• E-Procurement
• Government e-Marketplace (GeM)
• Tendering & Contract Management
• Inventory Management & Storage

Procedure
• Prevention of Sexual Harassment of

women at workplace
• Right to Information (RTI)
• Any other topic covered for General

Administration
Practical Training
on Computer (For
JSA/SSA/ASO/AD)

1 week
• MS-Excel
• MS-Powerpoint

29.6.3 Content Development Committee

a) Director (Admin Department)
b) Director (Finance Department)
c) Director (GSD)
d) 01 Representative from NITS

29.6.4 Resource Person / Faculty e

Competent personnel from BIS, Industry, academia, professional and overseas experts.

29.6.5 Training Methodology

a) Interactive Classroom Sessions.
b) Group exercises and discussions
c) Workshops and Case Studies.

29.7 Foreign exposure visits cum training of BIS officers

29.7.1 Introduction

Bureau of Indian Standards, the National Standards Body, catalyses the growth of national
economy and contributes towards robust quality ecosystem through its activities of Standards
Formulation and various Conformity Assessment Schemes, duly supported by pan-India
Laboratory infrastructure. Human resource is an important component of any organization for
delivering services in effective and efficient manner. Exposure visits cum trainings to peer
organisations and stakeholders is a proven effective tool for capacity building and shifting
attitudes and perceptions. It provides reflective spaces for participants to explore how examples
from other peer organisations could be applicable to their own processes. In pursuance to the
Training Policy of BIS, foreign exposure visits cum training shall be organised for BIS officers
to National Standards Bodies of other countries, stakeholders etc. It shall be endeavored that all
the eligible officers are trained at least once in 4 years.

29.7.2 Selection of Officers

Selection of Officers will be done as per Guidelines for Foreign exposure visits cum training of
BIS officers.

29.7.3 Duration, Course Structure and Batch Size

Duration, Course Structure and Batch Size will be decided in consultation with the concerned
National Standards Bodies of other countries, stakeholders, etc.
