---
source: Hm_Manual.pdf
title: Indian Standard IS 15820:2024
category: BIS Hallmarking
document_type: Hallmarking Regulation/Guideline
url: https://www.bis.gov.in
standard_code: IS 15820:2024
---

GENERIC
QUALITY MANUAL

[According to IS 15820:2024]

of

………….. Assaying & Hallmarking Centre
Address
City
State
India
Pin

Telephone No
Fax
Email
Website

Document No.

Issue Number

Issue Date

Prepared & Issued by Quality Manager

Approved by CEO

Copy No.
MASTER COPY

Copy Holder
QUALITY MANAGER

Recognition No of AHC

Section: 1
… ......... Assaying & Hallmarking Centre
AHC
Recognition
No
Contents

Section
Contents
Clause No. of

IS 15820

Page

No.

Cover page
1.1
Contents
1.2
Distribution Record
1.3
Amendment Record
1.4
Scope
1.5
References
1.6
Definitions
4 - 5
1.7
Abbreviations

2.1
Impartiality
2.2
Confidentiality
6-7
3.1
Organization
8-10

4.1
General
4.2
Personnel
4.3
Facilities and environmental conditions
12-13
4.4
Equipment
13-14
4.5
Metrological traceability
4.6
Externally provided products and services
14-15

5.1
Review of requests, tenders and contracts
5.2
Selection and verification of methods
16-17
5.3
Sampling
5.4
Handling of Test or Calibration Items
17-18
5.5
Packaging
5.6
Technical Records
5.7
Evaluation of Measurement Uncertainty
18-19
5.8
Ensuring the Validity of Results
5.9
Reporting of Results
19-20
5.10 Complaints
5.11 Nonconforming Work
5.12 Control of Data and Information Management
21-22

6.1
Management System
23-24
6.2
Control of Management system documents
6.3
Control of Records
6.4
Actions to Address Risks and Opportunities
6.5
Improvement
6.6
Corrective action
27-28
6.7
Internal Audits
6.8
Management Review
28-29

Annexes
Page No.
Annex I
List of Equipment, Chemicals/Reagents for Assaying
and Hallmarking

30-32

Annex II
Organization Structure
Annex III
Competence Requirements
34-35
Annex IV
Procedure for Measurement Uncertainty evaluation
36-38
Annex V
List of Records
39-40
Annex VI
Site Plan

1.2 Distribution Record

A controlled copy of this Quality Manual is issued to key persons of the centre/stakeholder.

The following are the authorized holders of the 'CONTROLLED COPY' of Quality Manual.

Controlled Copy No.
Name and Designation of the Copyholder

Shri/Smt ...................................................... , Chief Executive Officer

Shri/Smt ........................................................... , Quality Manager

Shri/Smt …………………………………………., Assaying In-charge

1.3 Amendment Record

Each copy holder of this Quality Manual shall be given a copy of the amendment as well as
this Amendment Record. The copy holder shall ensure that the Manual is kept up to date with
respect to amendments and obsolete page(s) of the Manual is/are duly returned to the Quality
Manager.

Amend-
ment
No.

Page

No.

Section/
Clause/
Sentence

Date
Details of
Amendment

Justification for

amendment

Signature
of Quality

Manager

1.4 Scope of M/s........... Assaying and Hallmarking Centre

M/s ........ Assaying and Hallmarking Centre (hereinafter is mentioned as "Centre" or "the

Centre') is a small organization having its major field of activity as assaying of gold/silver

samples and offers services of providing technically valid test results and hallmarking. The

management system has covered all operations of the Centre, namely:

For Gold: (a) Receiving (b) XRF examination (c) Sampling (d) Fire Assay (e) Reporting the

results (f) hallmarking and /or

For Silver: (a) Receiving (b) XRF examination (c) Sampling (d) Gravimetric/Potentiometric

method of test (e) Reporting the results (f) Hallmarking.

The working is based according to the requirements specified in IS 15820:2024.

1.5 References

This Quality Manual has been prepared by the Centre complying with the requirements of
following Indian Standards (ISs) and their amendment(s), wherever applicable:

Sl.
No.
IS No.
Title

01 IS 15820:2024
Establishment and Operation of Assaying and Hallmarking Centres
- General Requirements

IS 1417:2016
Gold and Gold Alloys, jewellery/artefacts - Fineness & Marking -
Specification

IS 1418:2009
Determination of Gold in Gold Bullion, Gold Alloys & Gold
jewellery/artefacts - Cupellation (Fire Assay) Method

IS 2112:2014
Silver and Silver Alloys, jewellery/artefacts - Fineness & Marking -
Specification

IS 2113:2014
Assaying Silver in Silver and Silver Alloys - Methods

1.6 Definitions

Term
Definition

Articles
Jewellery/artefacts

Assaying
The method of accurate determination of precious metal content in
a sample.

BIS

Customer
BIS registered jewellers and consumers

Global Customer
Exporter of gold/silver articles

Centre/the Centre
XYZ Assaying & Hallmarking Centre

Hallmarking
The accurate determination and official recording of the proportionate
content of the precious metal in precious metal articles

Product
Assay & Hallmarking services for gold/silver articles

1.7 Abbreviations

Abbreviated

Term
Expanded Form
Term
Full Form

A/c
Accounts
ML
Master List

ADM
Administration
NABL

National
Accreditation
Board
for
Testing
and
Calibration Laboratories
ALB
Assay Laboratory
NC
Non-conformity
BIS
OL
Obsolete
CH
Charts
PAD
Personnel & Administration
CD
Compact Disc
PL
Policy
CEO
Chief Executive Officer
PPT
Parts Per Thousand
DEO
Document of external origin
PSL
Personnel
FM
Format
PUR
Purchase
GR
General Records
QAC
Quality Assurance

HRD
Human
Resource
Development
QM
Quality Manual

IA
Internal Audit
QR
Quality Records
ID
Identification
QSY
Quality System

IGM
India Government Mint
QMS
Quality
Management
System

ISO
International Organization of
Standardization
RCV
Receiving

IS
Indian Standard
SP
Support Procedure
LBT
Laboratory Technician
SPL
Sampling
LS
List
TR
Technical Records
MGT
Management
TM
Test Methods
MKT
Marketing
WI
Work Instruction

Section 2:

GENERAL
REQUIREMENTS

… ......... Assaying & Hallmarking Centre
AHC
Recognition
No

(Clause No. 4 of IS 15820:2024)

2.1 Impartiality

2.1.1 The centre's activities are undertaken impartially and structured and managed so as to

safeguard impartiality. The work allocation of the employees is done in such a way that
impartiality is ensured.

2.1.2 The centre's management is committed to impartiality.

2.1.3 The centre does not allow commercial, financial or other pressures to compromise

impartiality. The management and personnel are required to maintain the integrity in their
work.

2.1.4 The centre identifies risks to its impartiality on an on-going basis. This includes those risks

that arise from its activities, or from its relationships, or from the relationships from its
personnel.

2.1.5 If a risk to impartiality is identified, the centre eliminates or minimizes such risks.

2.2
Confidentiality

2.2.1 The centre ensures the protection of its customer's confidential information and proprietary

rights, including protecting the electronic storage and transmission of results. In case centre
intends to place the information of customer in the public domain it shall inform the customer
in advance.

2.2.2 When the centre is required by law or authorized by contractual arrangements to release

confidential information, the customer concerned is notified of the information provided
(unless prohibited by law).

2.2.3 Information about the customer obtained from sources other than the customer is

confidential between the information provider and our centre. The provider of this
information is confidential to the centre and is not shared with the customer, unless agreed
by the source.

2.2.4 Personnel, including any committee members, contractors, personnel of external bodies,

or individuals acting on the centre's behalf, keep confidential all information obtained or
created during the performance of laboratory activities, except as required by law.

2.2.5 The Centre's policy is to ensure the protection of its customers information and proprietary

rights confidentially. The customer's confidential and proprietary rights are defined as (a)
Details of articles hallmarked and/or their HUID; (b) Rejections; (c) Details of articles
(weight and quantity) sent for Hallmarking and (d) Pattern and Design of Articles.
However, BIS will be furnished with the details on demand. The procedure followed is as
described below:
i) All personnel have been informed that confidentiality shall be always maintained and
honestly protected. Noncompliance will be dealt with very seriously by the management.
ii) An undertaking is taken in written form from all employees working in receiving, sampling,

XRF tester, assaying personnel, technicians, Laser operator, delivery staff to protect
confidential information and proprietary rights of all customers.
iii) Under no circumstances the results of assay be made known to any third party without
the written consent of the customer. The exclusion is BIS, who shall be furnished with details
on demand.
iv) Report shall not be sent by fax to any customer or BIS without management's prior
approval.

Section 3:

STRUCTURAL
REQUIREMENTS

… ......... Assaying & Hallmarking Centre
AHC
Recognition
No

(Clause No. 5 of IS 15820:2024)

3.1 Organization

Sl.
No.
PROFILE

i.
Name of the Centre
XYZ ASSAYING & HALLMARKING CENTRE

ii.
Date of establishment.
dd-mm-yyyy

iii.
Name of Parent Firm
M/s _______________________________

iv.
Type & details of Firm
Partnership Firm
involved in refining
of gold
and/or Operating the Assaying & Hallmarking Centre.

v.

Management
[Promoter(s)]
composition including
their business activities,
if there is any

1. Mr/Mrs
2. ..
3. ..

(The management as shown above has the overall responsibility
for the centre)

vi.
Statement

a) XYZ Assaying and Hallmarking Centre is a legal entity.

The promoters of this centre do not have any linkages
with
manufacturing
or
retailing
of
gold/silver
jewellery/artefacts.
b) The centre carries out assaying and Hallmarking

activities
complying
with
requirements
of IS
1418/2113 and IS 15820. It has been set up to meet
the needs of the centre's customers. The relevant
statutory and regulatory requirements are to be
complied with.

vii.
Managed & controlled by
… ....................................................., CEO

viii.
Address

………………………………………….,
PIN ……., State………., India

The centre does not carry out its activities at any other
facility/facilities except at the location/(s) covered under the
scope of recognition.

ix.
Communication details
: + 91-
: + 91-
E-mail:
Web Site: www.

x.
Legal status

Proprietorship/Partnership/ROC Firm
Registration No.
SSI Registration No.

xi.
Scope of Business
Gold and/or Silver Assaying and Hallmarking

xiii.
GST Registration No.

xiv.
Building
Receiving, XRF, sampling, weighing, fire assay/testing of
silver, hallmarking and administration office facilities.

xv.
Test/assay facility

XRF and assaying of gold in gold bullion, gold alloys and
articles - Cupellation (Fire Assay) method according to IS
1418. List of equipments for gold is given at Annex I(a).
Methods of assaying silver in silver and silver alloys
according to IS 2113:2014. List of equipments for
silver is given at Annex I (b).

xvi.
Quality management
aspects

 Competent Quality Manager, Assaying In-Charge and

key personnel

 Accuracy and sensitivity of instruments and equipment

 In-depth practical knowledge of samplers about

manufacturing of articles and skill (aptitude) in sampling

 Strict adherence to specified and documented fire assay

method

 Quality
control
of
critical
operations,
laboratory
consumables

 Training of personnel

 Work discipline

 Continual improvement
xvii
Work environment
 Facilities for correct performance of all steps commencing

from receiving to delivery

xviii
Customer
 Jeweller registered under BIS and other entity who

purchase Hallmarked articles

xix.
Input to Centre
 Articles, namely articles made up of gold and/or silver

for testing/assaying and Hallmarking

xx.
Output from Centre
 Hallmarked articles

 Cornets of gold samples

 Test Reports

 Delivery Voucher

xxi.
Security matters

 Closed circuit TV with back up facility of minimum 30

days storage

 Strong room/safe for storage of gold articles, certified

reference materials, cornets etc.

xxii.
Quality Manager

xxiii.
Assaying In-charge

xxiv.
Overall responsibility of
technical operations

xxv.
Protecting confidentially the
customer's needs.

3.1.1 Needs of Customer

Sl No
Needs of the Customer
i.
Assaying of articles shall be carried out as per IS 1418 and/or 2113.
ii.
Hallmarking Charges shall be as approved by BIS.
iii.
Residual test sample (cornet) shall be returned after testing along with Articles
iv.
Articles to be returned as per delivery voucher/invoice without any damage in proper
packing.

The Organizational Structure is given at Annex II describing the interrelationship between Centre's
personnel. The centre ensures that:

a) Communication takes place regarding the effectiveness of the management system and

the importance of meeting customer's and other requirements.
b) The integrity of the management system is maintained when changes to the

management system are planned and implemented.

Section 4:

RESOURCE
REQUIREMENTS

… ......... Assaying & Hallmarking Centre
AHC
Recognition
No

(Clause No. 6 of IS 15820:2024)

4.1 General

4.1.1 The center has the personnel, facilities, equipment, systems, and support services

required to conduct its laboratory activities.

4.2 Personnel

4.2.1 All personnel of the centre, either internal or external, that could influence the centre

activities act impartially, are competent and work in accordance with the laboratory's
management system.

4.2.2 The competence requirements for each function influencing the results of centre

activities, including requirements for education, qualification, training, technical
knowledge, skills and experience has been documented in Annex III.

4.2.3 The centre ensures that the personnel have the competence to perform laboratory

activities for which they are responsible and to evaluate the significance of deviations,
through following means, where appropriate, but not be limited to:

a) Qualification
b) Training
c) Experience
d) Monitoring

4.2.4 Instructions have been issued to all personnel who manage, perform or verify work

affecting the quality of the tests and assay to ensure that each of them is aware of the
extent and limitations of his areas of responsibility and authority. The centre has
provided authority and resources to each individual to initiate action to prevent or
minimize any deviation in their respective areas. The centre ensures that all staff are
adequately qualified and experienced to perform the duties assigned to them with
respect to their position.
4.2.5 The Centre's management has assigned the Quality Manager with responsibility for

ensuring that Management System is implemented in the Centre and followed at all
times. The Quality Manager has direct access to the highest level of the Centre's
management, namely the CEO for decisions on policy and/or resources.
4.2.6 The Assaying In-charge has been assigned with overall responsibilities of technical

operations of the Centre as a whole and provision of resources to ensure the required
quality and time management.
4.2.7 The Centre has appointed following deputies for key managerial personnel:

Sl.
No.
Person
Deputy to

Name of deputy Assaying Incharge

Assaying In-charge

Name of Deputy Quality Manager
Quality Manager

4.3 Facilities and environmental conditions

4.3.1 The facilities and environmental conditions available in the centre are suitable for the

centre's activities and do not adversely affect the validity of results.

4.3.2 The Centre follows procedure to facilitate correct performance of the test by means of

providing appropriate facilities for assaying and hallmarking, including but not limited to
energy sources, lighting and environmental conditions.

4.3.3 The Centre has a well-maintained building with facilities for continuous supply of

electricity and running water, suitably illuminated and ventilated. The environmental
conditions suitable for working shall be maintained. It also has effective separation
between area with incompatible activities, closed circuit TV systems for security and
verification of activities ensuring capturing of all activities being carried out in the centre,
ergonomically
designed
work
tables,
sitting
arrangements
and
up-to-date
communication outfits and arrangements. These facilities are to ensure correct
performance of tests.

4.3.4 The Centre monitors, controls and records environmental conditions as required by the

relevant specifications, methods and procedures or where they influence the quality of
the results. Due attention shall be paid, for example, to following:

i
Contamination, dust, electromagnetic disturbances, radiation, humidity, electrical supply,
temperature in the entire Centre, with specific reference to sound and vibration levels in
microbalance, XRF machine and laser marking machine;
ii
Proper exhaust arrangement for furnaces and parting chamber.
iii
Proper treatment of exhaust fumes before discharge into the atmosphere.
iv
Uninterrupted power supply arrangement / power backup arrangement.

Conditions for Accommodation and Environment.

Sl.
No.
Description
XRF
Room

Sampling

Room

Balance

Room

Fire
Assay
Room

Hallmarking

Room

Accommodation

1.
Ergonomically designed seating
arrangements and work tables.



--


2.
Appropriate lighting on each work
station






3.
Weighing Balances



--
--

4.
Vibration free work tables
--
--

--


5.
Furnaces with temperature
controllers
--
--
--

--

6.

Furnaces with exhaust system and
arrangements for treatment of
fumes before discharge

--
--
--

--

7.
Fuming hood with scrubber
system
--
--
--

--

8.
Personal protective equipment for
Lab. Technicians as per need
--
--
--

--

9.
Uninterrupted power supply
arrangement






Environment
10.
Dust Free Atmosphere





11.
Humid Free Atmosphere






4.3.5 The infrastructure and test equipment are daily verified by the Quality Manager and the

person is empowered to stop activity when any defect/break-down in the system is
noticed which may give rise to adverse environmental conditions jeopardizing the
results of activities. The Quality Manager is also empowered for taking quick corrective
measures.
4.3.6 Weigh-in room, the most sensitive area of the Centre where high precision balances

are installed, is effectively separated against any type of incompatible activities and
vibrations.
4.3.7 Access to areas of the Centre's facility is restricted except the receipt and delivery

areas, waiting areas and wash rooms. However, these areas (except inside of wash
rooms) are under CCTV.
4.3.8 Technical staff will have access to various areas of the Centre. Security personnel will

be engaged to manage security aspects of the entire centre.
4.3.9 The centre has installed CCTV cameras with a minimum recording of 30 days to ensure

that all the activities are captured day and night for the purpose of security as well as
verification of the activities.

4.4 Equipment

4.4.1 The centre has access to equipment that is required for the correct performance of centre's

activities and that can influence the results.
4.4.2 The centre does not use equipment outside its permanent control.

4.4.3 Conformity of the equipment to specified requirements before being placed or returned into

service is verified.

4.4.4 The equipments are procured as per the required measurement accuracy and/or

measurement uncertainty to provide a valid result and used after verification.

4.4.5 Measuring equipments are calibrated when:

4.4.5.1
The measurement accuracy or measurement uncertainty affects the validity of the
reported results, and/or
4.4.5.2
Calibration of the equipment is required to establish the metrological
traceability of the reported results.

4.4.6 Calibration programme is established, reviewed and adjusted as necessary in order to

maintain confidence in the status of calibration.

4.4.7 All calibrated equipments have been provided with label to readily identify the status of

calibration or period of validity.

4.4.8 Equipment that has been subjected to overloading or mishandling, gives questionable

results, or has been shown to be defective or outside specified requirements, is taken out
of service. It is clearly labelled as being out of service/order, until it has been

repaired/corrected and verified to perform correctly.
4.4.9 Internal checks are performed as per the frequency recommended in Annexure-D of the IS

15820:2024.

4.4.10 Wherever calibration and reference material data include reference values or correction

factors, it is ensured that reference values and correction factors are updated and
implemented, as appropriate, to meet specified requirements.

4.4.11 Unintended adjustment of equipment, which may invalidate results, is prevented by use of

equipment by authorized personnel only.

4.4.12 The record of the equipment/s which can influence centre's activities is maintained.

4.5 Metrological traceability

4.5.1 The centre has established and maintains metrological traceability of its measurement

results by means of a documented unbroken chain of calibrations, each contributing to
the measurement uncertainty, linking them to an appropriate reference.
4.5.2 The centre ensures that measurement results are traceable to the International System

of Units (SI) through:
4.5.2.1
Calibration provided by a competent IS 17025 accredited calibration centre, having
requisite scope of accreditation; and
4.5.2.2
Certified values of certified reference materials provided by a competent producer
IS 17034 accredited reference material producer (RMP) or IS 17025 accredited
centre having accredited scope/BND.

4.6 Externally provided products and services

4.6.1 The centre ensures that only suitable externally provided products, such as cupels, water,
reagents-acids, proof gold, silver, copper, lead, nickel, palladium, XRF standards, reference
weights and services such as calibration services, annual maintenance contract etc that affect
centre's activities are used, when such products and services:

a) are intended for incorporation into the centre's own activities; and

b) are used to support the operation of the centre.

4.6.2 The centre has a procedure and retains records for:

a) Defining, reviewing and approving the centre's requirements for externally provided

products and services;

b) Defining the criteria for evaluation, selection, monitoring of performance and re- evaluation

of the external providers;

c) Ensuring that externally provided products and services conform to the centre's established

requirements, or when applicable, to the relevant requirements of this document, before
they are used or directly provided to the customer; and

d) Taking any actions arising from evaluations, monitoring of performance and re- evaluations

of the external providers.

4.6.3 Communication with external providers are done for:

a) The products and services to be provided;

b) The acceptance criteria;

c) Competence, including any required qualification of personnel; and

d) Activities that the centre, or its customer, intends to perform at the external provider's

premises.

4.6.4 The centre follows the following procedure for purchase of products and services that
affect the quality of assaying and hallmarking activities. The procedure covers purchase,
receipt and storage of reagents, consumable materials relevant to assaying and hallmarking.

1. Quality Manager and Assaying In-charge are jointly responsible for selection and purchase
of services and supplies the Centre uses that affect the quality of the tests which require to
be consistently complying with standard specifications.

2. Selection and fixing up of suppliers for capital goods like test equipment, accessories,
precision instruments, hand tools etc. Authorizing selection and fixing up of services providers
for calibration of equipment is done based on NABL accreditation.

3. The centre evaluates suppliers of all critical consumables, supplies and services which
affect the quality of assaying & hallmarking, based upon their overall past performance on
quality delivery, price and pre and post purchasing services, and maintains records of these
evaluation and list approved suppliers and service providers.

4. Quotations are usually invited telephonically and through emails, reviewed and the terms
of supplies are negotiated before purchase. Assaying In-charge prepares Purchase Order for
items which may affect the quality of testing, with data types like, class, grade, precise
identification, specification, inspection instructions, the quality required and other technical
details as applicable which describes the services or supplies ordered. CEO reviews this
Purchase Order and approves prior to release.

5. The Centre inspects or otherwise verifies and thus ensures that all critical purchased
supplies and reagents and laboratory consumable materials that affect the quality of the
testing are not used until verified as complying with defined specifications maintained in the
Purchase Order and records of actions taken to demonstrate compliance are maintained.

6. Quality Manager takes action for identification, segregation of substandard purchased
item(s) if any nonconformance is observed during inspection and record is maintained. Assay
In-charge maintains records of such inspection/verification.

7. CEO is responsible for authorizing purchases of capital goods, laboratory consumables
including certified reference materials e.g. Au. Ag, Cu, Pb, Acids etc.

8. Records of all purchases are kept.

Section 5:

PROCESS
REQUIREMENTS

… ......... Assaying & Hallmarking Centre
AHC
Recognition
No

(Clause No. 7 of IS 15820:2024)

5.1 Review of requests, tenders and contracts

5.1.1 CEO is responsible for marketing activity and signing contract with customers. The
procedure is as follows:-

1. Quality Manager/receptionist reviews the customer's request sent along with the articles and

communicates to customer about deviations and carries out amendment of the contract as
may be required.
2. The centre ensures that the hallmarking is done for articles received only from those

jewellers registered by BIS. Records of such BIS registered jewellers whose articles are
received for hallmarking are maintained. The centre has internet facility to access the BIS
website for ascertaining the current status of the registered jewellers.
3. The Centre accepts only such articles which are capable of being hallmarked.
4. The Centre hallmarks and returns the articles to customers within 48 hours at First come

First serve (FIFO) basis.
5. The Centre undertakes to perform assaying of articles/samples of Hallmarked articles from

consumers on priority. Assay Report shall be issued, based on the relevant Indian Standard,
as per the guidelines for testing of consumer gold.
6. The centre reviews the requests for hallmarking. The established procedure is to examine

the request as well as each article in the consignment to check for the following:
i. Whether request is received from a BIS registered jeweller;
ii. The scope and validity of submitted licence;
iii. Markings on the articles (articles with any marking will not be accepted);
iv. Quantity in numbers, corresponding weight with respective declared fineness;

v. Design for articles (medallions/coins resembling currency of any country will not be

accepted for Hallmarking);
vi. The capability in respect of available of CRMs;
vii. The capability in respect of meeting delivery time schedule;
viii. Delivery Mode & Charges, if any;

ix. Hallmarking charges applicable; and
7. Records of reviews, including any significant changes is maintained. Record is also maintained
of pertinent discussion with a customer relating to the customer's requirements or the results of
the work during the period of execution of the contract.
8. The customer is informed of any deviation from the contract.
9. If a contract needs to be amended after work has commenced, the same contract review
process is repeated and amendments are communicated to all affected personnel.

5.2 Selection and verification of methods

5.2.1 The Centre uses test methods as described in the latest valid version of relevant testing
method standards (IS 1418:2009 for gold jewellery and/or IS 2113:2014 for silver jewellery) and
has documented procedures/work instructions for all activities of centre such as.

a) Receiving;

b) Preliminary examination for homogeneity check and segregation;

c) Sampling;

d) Assaying;

e) Laser marking;

f) Verification of marking and damages incurred;

g) Packaging and return of cornets, if any; and

h) Final dispatch delivery.

5.2.2 All methods, procedures and supporting documentation, such as instructions, standards,
manuals and reference data relevant to the centre's activities, is up to date and readily available to
personnel.

5.2.3 The centre ensures that it uses the latest valid version of a method unless it is not appropriate
or possible to do so. When necessary, the application of the method is supplemented with additional
details to ensure consistent application.

5.2.4 The centre verifies that it can properly perform methods before introducing them by ensuring
that it can achieve the required performance. Records of the verification is retained. If the method
is revised by the issuing body, verification shall be repeated to the extent necessary.

5.2.5 The Assaying In-charge is responsible for all tests and assay works including maintenance
and control of associated data and records.

5.3 Sampling

The sampling is done in accordance with the requirements mentioned below:-

a) The centre carries out sampling as per sampling plan given in Annex E and guidelines for

sampling as given in Annex F of IS 15820 : 2024.

b) The centre carries out sampling using special tools to get a representative sample as per

relevant testing method standards and documented instructions maintained by assaying
and hallmarking centre;

c) The centre retains records which include the sampling method used, identification of

samples data to identified lot/sub lot from which representative sample has been taken and
the sampling personnel, date and time of sampling;

d) Samples have identifiable traceability with the lot and the test result; and

e) The sampling plan and method is available at the site where sampling is undertaken.

5.4 Handling of Test or Calibration Items

The procedure for handling of test items is as follows:
5.4.1 The centre accepts the hallmarked gold jewellery from customers for verifying its

fineness.
5.4.2 Lots of individual items shall be segregated, for example rings, ear tops, bangles

etc.

5.4.3 A receipt of the lot shall be issued to the jeweller, simultaneously allotting a unique

code number. This code number shall be maintained throughout the processing,
storage and handling of the lot till its assay results have been finalized.
5.4.4 A room with safe is available with adequate locking arrangements in the Centre for

storage of articles during working hours and overnight.
5.4.5 Security system with closed circuit TV and monitoring system is available for keeping

round-the-clock watch centrally about internal activities and also about nearby
surroundings of the centre as a preventive measure.
5.4.6 The centre has taken insurance for articles / articles under process / stock and high

cost equipments for minimum amount of Rs. 40 lakhs depending on the jewellery
present in the centre at any time.
5.4.7 The centre shall return cornets of jewellery articles along with hallmarked

jewellery/rejected jewellery articles. The hallmarking process shall be completed in
48 hours, any deviation from the same shall be recorded with justification.
5.4.8 The centre has taken professional indemnity insurance to cover the liability of

hallmarked jewellery/artefacts with respect to purity/fineness for a minimum amount
of Rs. 2 Lakh.

5.5 Packaging

5.5.1 The Centre ensures identity of the lot during final packaging for:

a) Un-assayed articles / articles after first stage of sampling;
b) Hallmarked articles / articles;
c) Rejected articles / articles and
d) Cornets (left after assaying of gold articles)

5.5.2 Items are suitably protected in final packaging for transportation (if required) delivery.

5.6 Technical Records

5.6.1 The centre ensures that technical records for each activity which contain the results, report
and sufficient information to facilitate, if possible, identification of factors affecting the measurement
result and its associated measurement uncertainty and enable the repetition of the centre activity
under conditions as close as possible to the original.

5.6.2 All records including that for jewellery/artefacts hallmarked for each of the Bureau of Indian
Standards licensee shall be retained for a period of minimum 3 years.

5.6.3 The centre ensures that amendments to technical records can be tracked to previous versions
or to original observations. Both the original and amended data and files shall be retained, including
the date of alteration, an indication of the altered aspects and the personnel responsible for the
alterations.

5.6.4 Assaying In-Charge is responsible for maintaining and controlling all technical records, which
result from carrying out tests.

5.6.5 Centre records observations data and calculations at the time they are made and ensures
that they are identifiable to the specified task. Centre ensures that when mistakes occur in records,
each mistake is crossed out and not erased, made illegible or deleted and the correct value entered
alongside. All such alterations to records are signed or initialed by the person making the correction.

5.7 Evaluation of Measurement Uncertainty

5.7.1 The contributions to measurement uncertainty are identified and all contributions that are of
significance are taken into account using appropriate methods of analysis, while evaluating
measurement uncertainty.

5.7.2 The centre evaluates measurement uncertainty. Where the test method precludes rigorous
evaluation of measurement uncertainty, an estimation shall be made based on an understanding
of the theoretical principles or practical experience of the performance of the method as per AnnexIV

5.8 Ensuring the Validity of Results

5.8.1 The monitoring of the validity of results is planned and reviewed and includes, where
appropriate, but not limited to:

a) Use of reference materials or quality control materials;

b) Functional check(s) of measuring and testing equipment;

c) Use of check or working standards with control charts, where applicable;

d) Intermediate checks on measuring equipment;

e) Replicate tests using the same or different methods;

f) Retesting of retained items; and

g) Review of reported results;

5.8.2 The centre monitors its performance by comparison with results of other centre, where
available and appropriate. This monitoring shall be planned and reviewed and shall include, but not
be limited to, the following:
5.8.2.1 The centre participates in at least one Proficiency testing (PT) every year and ensure that
grades nearest to 995‰, 916.0‰, 750.0‰ & 585.0‰ as well as white gold are covered on rotational
basis in period of three years. In case of silver the centre participates in proficiency testing of one
grade of silver alloys, with finenesss as close as possible to grades specified in IS 2112.

5.8.2.2 In addition to Proficiency testing, the centre makes efforts to initiate/participate in Inter
laboratory comparisons (ILC) every year. However, in case PT provider for a specific grade is not
available, ILC shall be mandatorily undertaken.

5.9 Reporting of Results

5.9.1 The test report as well as delivery challan for gold and/or silver samples is generated through
the BIS hallmarking portal.

5.9.2 The centre is responsible for all the information provided in the report, except when
information is provided by the customer. Data provided by a customer shall be clearly identified.

5.9.3 Laser Marking

5.9.3.1 The centre carries out marking using laser marking machines and on articles which are
conforming to the requirement of IS 1417 or IS 2112. The markings are legible and durable.

5.9.3.2 Marking on the gold and/or silver items shall be as mentioned in IS 1417 or IS 2112
respectively.

5.9.3.3 The permissible sizes (height) of the hallmark are:

Sl
 No.

Gold

mm

Silver

mm

(1)
(2)
(3)

i)
1.5
4.0

ii)
1.0
2.0

iii)
0.75
1.5

iv)
0.50
1.0

NOTE ― In case of gold articles below 2 gms marking size (height) of 0.3 mm is also permitted

5.9.3.4 Marking is done on all parts which are detachable and can be easily removed or replaced.

5.9.3.5 Marking is done only on those articles which are permitted in IS 1417/IS 2112 and in the
way mentioned in these standards.

5.9.3.6 The laser marking machine shall be used through a password to avoid unauthorized use.
Vigilance shall be maintained to prevent any misuse of the password.

5.10 Complaints

5.10.1 The centre has a documented process to receive, evaluate and make decisions on
complaints.

5.10.2 The procedure for receiving, recording, investigating and resolution of customer complaints
is as follows:

a) Complaints shall be received by the Quality Manager and recorded, including those conveyed
telephonically. CEO shall examine each complaint, carry out necessary investigation and take
appropriate action for quick redressal of the complainant. Complaints shall be resolved within one
month wherein progress reports and the outcome are provided to the complainant. In case a
complaint is not resolved within given time frame, the same shall be brought to the knowledge of
BIS.

b) If the complaint is challenged, the final authority for resolving the same lies with BIS.

c) When a complainant or any stakeholder including BIS raises doubt concerning the Centre's
compliance with the laid down policies and procedures, or with the requirements of this Manual or
otherwise concerning the quality of assaying and hallmarking, the Centre shall ensure that those
area of activity and responsibility involved are promptly audited in accordance with laid down
procedures. Quality Manager shall plan the audit and convey the findings/report for management
review.

5.10.3 A description of the handling process for complaints shall be available to any interested party
on request. Upon receipt of a complaint, the centre shall confirm whether the complaint relates to
centre activities that it is responsible for and, if so, shall deal with it. The centre shall be responsible
for all decisions at all levels of the handling process for complaints.

5.10.4 The outcomes to be communicated to the complainant are made by, or reviewed and
approved by, individual(s) not involved in the activities in question.

5.11 Nonconforming Work

5.11.1 The centre has developed this procedure to identify non-conformity at any stage of assaying
and hallmarking and to prevent it from further processing. It covers from receiving, XRF analysis,
sampling, assaying, Hallmarking and delivery and to take necessary action based on detected
nonconformity. The procedure for control of non-conforming testing work shall be as follows. Centre
has identified the potential non-conformities as follows:


Fineness is less than declared value in Hallmarked article (customer sample testing);

Presence of prohibited elements in Hallmarked article;

Error in reporting of results;

Weight of gold is less than declared for the Hallmarked article;

Error in weighing balances;

Certified reference material is of lower purity;

Hallmark is not distinct/legible;

Spurious Hallmarking done;


Equipment out of calibration;

Error in sampling;

Assaying and/or Hallmarking Staff not competent;

Unsatisfactory performance reported by BIS during its assessment;

Sample of hallmarked article drawn by BIS during market surveillance at jeweller failed
on in test at BIS laboratory;

Internal audit not done;

Management review is found having not covered all aspects under review.

5.11.2
CEO shall examine and evaluate whether any one or more of the above-mentioned
non-conformities or others are occurring or in existence. Significance of non-conformity
shall be determined. Correction shall immediately be done. Some corrections may be,
for example any incoming material found nonconforming shall be rejected and returned
to supplier. Later, root cause analysis shall be done and corrective action shall be
taken.
5.11.3
Fresh sampling shall be done under supervision of Quality Manager in case improper
sampling was the cause of non-conformity. Fresh sampling and testing shall be done
if any flaw is observed in the fire assay process. The particular sample or whole batch
shall be repeated.
5.11.4
Quality Manager/Assay In-charge shall be responsible for implementing the procedure.
CEO shall be responsible for all corrections. Corrective actions in case of repeated
non-conformances are reported. Product may be recalled from the jeweller with
advance notification if non-conformity is noticed in the system post facto delivery of
Hallmarked article.
5.11.5
The centre retains records of nonconforming work and actions specified above.

5.12 Control of Data and Information Management

5.12.1 The centre has access to the data and information needed to perform centre activities.

5.12.2 The centre uses the BIS hallmarking portal for the collection, processing, recording,
reporting, storage or retrieval of data which is implemented centrally for all BIS Recognised AHCs.
Whenever there are any changes, including centre software configuration or modifications to the
software, they shall be authorized, documented and validated before implementation.

5.12.3 The hallmarking portal used by the centre is:

a) protected from unauthorized access;

b) safeguarded against tampering and loss;

c) operated in an environment that complies with BIS requirements

5.12.4 The centre ensures that personnels operating the system comply with all applicable
requirements of this document.

5.12.5 The centre ensures that instructions, manuals and reference data relevant to the BIS
hallmarking portal are made readily available to its personnel.

5.12.6 Calculations and data transfers are checked in an appropriate and systematic manner.

Section 6:

MANAGEMENT
SYSTEM
REQUIREMENTS

… ......... Assaying & Hallmarking Centre

Recognition No of

AHC

(Clause No. 8 of IS 15820:2024)

6.1 Management System

1. The organization has established, documented, implemented and maintains a
management system appropriate to assaying and hallmarking as per IS 15820:2024. The
Centre's management system is appropriate to the scope of its activities and in accordance
with IS 15820:2024.
2. The Centre's quality policy, objectives, roles and responsibilities of key personnel have
been framed and given in this manual. The Q uality Policy statement is signed by Chief
Executive Officer who also takes decisions on the resources. The statement includes the
following:

a) commitment in relation to quality of centre's assaying and hallmarking services and to
provide its customers at all times with a service complying with recognized standard of practice
as given in relevant Indian Standards;
b) purpose of management system related to quality;
c) statement that all staff have familiarized themselves with the content of the Quality Manual
and comply with the laid down policies and procedures and associated documentation at all
times in their work; and
d) commitment to compliance with IS 15820:2024 and continually improve the management
effectiveness.

3. Top management of the Centre has ensured that the Quality Policy is communicated to and
understood by those personnel who are responsible for maintaining the quality management
system at all the levels.
4. Top management provides evidence of commitment to the development and
implementation of the management system and continually improving its effectiveness by
following the documents of all levels meticulously including carrying out internal audit and
management review meeting, handling customer's complaint, discussion on improvement
5. The top management communicates to the employees the importance of the meeting
customer's requirements as well as statutory & and regulatory requirements.
6. The supporting procedures and technical procedures have been included in this Manual
explaining their actual implementation. No separate documentation has been prepared.

7. The procedures have been integrated with individual clauses where reference has been
made in the Indian Standard. Standalone Procedure has not been developed and implemented.
8. The management system of the centre addresses the following:

a) Management system documentation;
b) Control of management system documents (6.2);
c) Control of records (6.3);
d) Actions to address risks and opportunities; improvement (6.4);
e) Corrective actions (6.5);
f) Internal audits (6.6); and
g) Management reviews (6.7).

QUALITY POLICY

XYZ Assaying & Hallmarking Centre is totally committed to comply with the requirements of
IS 15820:2024 to facilitate smooth operation of Bureau's Hallmarking Scheme with high
degree of credibility, integrity, competence, impartiality and consistent operation.

The centre is, therefore, committed to provide timely and efficient services to meet the
following objectives:-

1) to consistently serve, meet and exceed overall expectations of customer about quality of
assaying and hallmarking with error free and technically valid results;

2) to pursue better professional practices and continually improve the services and systems;

3) to periodically train key technical persons and employees whose services may affect the
quality of Centre's performance, thereby enhance satisfaction of customers;

4) to continuously endeavor to build and maintain reputation of the Centre being absolute
trustworthy in eyes of its valued customers who are primarily jewelers; and

5) to familiarize all personnel concerned with testing activity with the quality documentation
and implement the policies and procedures in their work.

6) to perform testing activity in accordance with methods prescribed in relevant Indian
Standards.

Place:
[Chief Executive Officer]
Date :

[This Quality Policy is communicated to all employees, explained to them so that it is
understood and accepted by each individual as a prime responsibility while delivering the
services.]

QUALITY OBJECTIVES

In order to meet the commitments made in the Quality Policy, following quality objectives have
been framed:


Maintain our current status of a leading, quality conscious Assaying and Hallmarking
Centre which operates as a technically competent service provider; quality system;


To maximize creation of value and satisfaction of all customers;


Provide conducive and growth-oriented environment to employees through HRD
activities and thereby develop the centre as the role model for others;


Continue to further strengthen and maintain a reputation for being always absolutely
trustworthy.

Place:
[Chief Executive Officer]
Date :

6.2 Control of Management system documents

1.
The centre has established and maintained procedures to control all documents (both
internal and external) which form part of the management system from receipt to delivery of
articles. The Quality Manager is responsible for documentation and establishing, maintaining
control of all documents in the Centre. The various types of documents required by the Centre
are as follows:

Documents of Internal Origin

i.
Quality Policy
ii. Quality Manual
iii. Forms
iv. Reports
v. Records

Documents of External Origin

i.
Indian Standards
ii. Guidelines/Policy/Instructions/Circulars from BIS
iii. Other regulations, namely Standards of Weights & Measures Act
iv. Calibration certificates
v. Test Reports on Certified Reference Materials
vi. Software used - XRF, Laser Marking, Others
vii. Copies of registration from jewelers
viii. Copies of insurance
ix. Copies of clearance from applicable regulatory authorities
x. Operating Manuals of equipment

2.
The procedure to control all documents (internal or external origin) is described as
follows:


The Quality Manager is authorized to prepare documents and issue them with prior
review and approval by CEO including changes / amendments in existing
documentation.


A Master List of all documents (internal or external origin) identifying the current revision
status and distribution is available with Quality Manager to avoid use of invalid and/or
obsolete documents.

The Quality Manager ensures that only authorized edition of appropriate document is
available at workstation where operations essential for effective functioning of the
Centre.

Periodic review of documents is done to ensure continuous suitability and compliance
with applicable requirements.

Any invalid or obsolete document is promptly removed from all points of use. Only one
copy of such document is kept with Quality Manager after putting stamp of 'OBSOLETE
DOCUMENT" and assuring any unintended use. Obsolete documents when retained for
either legal or knowledge preservation are marked with stamp 'FOR REFERENCE
ONLY".

Each document is uniquely numbered. Master Copy of each document is maintained
indicating date of issue, revision status, page numbering etc. If necessary, due to any
special reason, primarily related to testing and/or assay of samples, the views of Assay
In-charge will be taken while reviewing the existing documentation and maintaining
appropriate records.

6.3
Control of Records

1.
Quality Manager is overall responsible for implementing in the Centre the procedure
for control of records, which includes identification, collection, indexing, access, filing,
storage, maintenance and disposal of quality and technical records. The responsibility of
centre's management is to maintain and control of records pertaining to management system
and technical activities and maintain confidentiality, protect and ensure security of records,
especially records in the computers. A list of records available at Annex V include reports
from internal audits and management reviews as well as records of corrective and preventive
actions etc. Technical records includes original observations, derived data, internal / external
calibration records, staff records, a copy of each assay report, contracts, external and internal
test reports, customers papers and feedbacks and personnel responsible for the sampling,
performance of test and checking of results.
2.
CEO is responsible for maintaining and controlling other records such as contracts,
rate card, Moral agreements etc.
3.
Assaying In-Charge is responsible for maintaining and controlling all technical records,
which result from carrying out tests.

4.
Quality Manager continually educates centre's personnel to maintain legibility of all
records and these records are stored and retained in a safe cupboard in an orderly manner
so that they are readily retrievable. The records are indexed as per utility such as (a) date
wise; (b) customer / unique identification wise; (c) batch wise etc. When files of records are
full they are collected and appropriately numbered and stored in safe cupboard. The Centre
provides the safe area with clean, dust and termite free environment in order to prevent
damage or deterioration and the cupboard is kept under lock and key to prevent loss and
unauthorized access to or amendment of these records.
5.
Centre also maintains records in electronic form with a system of password protection
to avoid loss or change of original data.
6.
All confidential records are kept in a safe cupboard under lock and key.
7.
Technical records are collection of data and information which result from carrying out
tests and which include whether specified quality or process is achieved. They may include
forms, contracts, work registers, check sheets, control graphs, external and internal test
reports and calibration certificates, customer's notes, papers and feedback.
8.
Centre carefully retains records of original observations, signed documents, derived
data and sufficient information to establish an audit trail, calibration records, staff records
and for a defined period after completion of the work involved.
9.
Centre ensures that the Assay Note (record) for each test contains sufficient
information to enable the test to be repeated under condition as close as possible to the
original. The records generated include all test data and the test results, identity of personnel
responsible for the performance of each test and checking of result, hallmarking and delivery.
10.
Centre records observations data and calculations at the time they are made and
ensures that they are identifiable to the specified task. Centre ensures that when mistakes
occur in records, each mistake is crossed out and not erased, made illegible or deleted and
the correct value entered alongside. All such alterations to records are signed or initialed by
the person making the correction.
11.
All records including that for articles hallmarked for each registered jeweller shall be
maintained for a period of minimum three years. Quality Manager will collect all records after
retention time is over and dispose them off through burning them out or deleting them from
the computer files in case of stored in electronic media.

6.4 Actions to Address Risks and Opportunities

The centre identifies the risks at all levels of management system and explore the measures
to address them for their non-occurrence and non-recurrence. The centre continuously plans
and implements the actions to address the risks and opportunities for maintaining the
effectiveness of the management, achieving the improvement and to prevent the adverse
effects. Any effects on impartiality, management of nonconformance work, conformity
assessment and improvement are considered as risks of higher level. Quality Manager is
responsible for Risk management in the Quality related issues and the Assay in charge is
responsible for the risk management in the technical matters. The Quality Manager and Assay
in charge shall evaluate the identified risks and explore the opportunities and take appropriate
actions to address them with the approval of the CEO. The centre considers the risks and
opportunities associated with the laboratory activities in order to:

a. Give assurance that the management system achieves its intended results;
b. Enhanceopportunitiestoachievethepurposeandobjectivesofthelaboratory;
c. Prevent or reduce, undesired impacts and potential failures in the laboratory activities;
d. Achieve improvement.

The centre takes the actions to address risks and opportunities proportional to the potential
impact on the validity of centre results.

6.5
Improvement

The Centre has prepared following plan for continually improve the effectiveness of its
management system. The method as will be followed is explained below:

i) Centre's personnel have been assigned responsibility for accomplishing particular Quality

Objectives;
ii) Internal audit will be periodically conducted covering all operations included in its

management system. The audit report will be discussed in management review;
iii) All operational data will be collected and analyzed including trends and risk analysis;
iv) All observed nonconformities shall be given priority taking corrective action to resolve and

prevent recurrence;
v) Plan to take preventive action to prevent occurrence of potential nonconformity; and
vi) Management review shall be periodically conducted to discuss reports of internal and

external audits, nonconformities, complaints. Improvement actions will be decided with
assigning responsibility and fixing time bound targets. Regular monitoring by CEO shall
be done.

The Centre seeks feedback, both positive and negative, from its customers. The feedback
shall be analyzed and used to improve the management system, laboratory activities and
customer service.

6.6
Corrective action

The Centre has established following procedure and has designated Quality Manager with
responsibility for planning the corrective actions:
1. Assaying In-charge will be responsible for implementing and monitoring appropriate

corrective actions when nonconforming work or departures from the procedures in the
management system or technical operations have emanated as a result of daily
operations, internal or external audits, management reviews, feedback from customer
and/or staff observations, complaints.
2. Quality Manager or his authorized person will investigate the various types of non-

conformances observed/reported and determine the root cause(s) in each of the identified
problems.
3. Assaying In-charge will initiate corrective action/s where needed. The corrective action shall

be to a degree appropriate to the magnitude and the risk of the problem. The technical
operations of the Centre are not complex; therefore, elaborate method of root cause
analysis is normally not required.
4. CEO shall oversee that action(s) being taken will eliminate the problem and prevent

recurrence(s). He will monitor the results to ensure that the corrective actions taken have
been effective. Otherwise, the procedure will be repeated with different alternatives till
expected and satisfactory results are accomplished.
5. All such cases shall be appropriately recorded and discussed at management review

meeting for effecting continual improvement. Results shall also be monitored regularly to
ensure effectiveness of corrective action.

6.7
Internal Audits

1.
The Centre's policy is to conduct an internal audit of its all activities once in a year, in
accordance with a predetermined schedule to verify that its operations continue to comply with
the requirements of the documented management system based on IS 15820:2024 in order
to continually improve its effectiveness. The procedural details are described below.
2.
Quality Manager will be responsible for planning and organizing of internal audit [IA]
and coordinating the corrective actions. An annual program for internal audit will be prepared
to verify that the Centre's operations continue to comply with the requirements of the
documented management system and IS 15820:2024. The Centre will have its own trained
internal auditors. However, in order justify impartiality of audited function, the management
may obtain the services of a trained external auditor to effectively carry out internal audit as
per pre - determined schedule.
3.
Quality Manager will provide overall supervision while the audit is being conducted. All
concerned personnel will be informed well in advance about programme. Documents like Audit
Check List, Observation & Finding Form, Nonconformance Report will be provided to each
auditor for recording the audit findings and corrective actions that arise from them. Auditors
will be independent of the activity to be audited.

4.
The Centre is committed to take timely corrective actions and notify the customers
orally/ in writing, if the audit finding cast doubt on the effectiveness of the operations or on the
correctness/validity of test results.
5.
A follow up audit of activities may be required when nonconformance was reported to
verify implementation and effectiveness of the corrective action taken and record the same
and finally closing the non-conformity.

6.8
Management Review

1.
The Centre is committed to conduct a review at least once a year with CEO in chair of
its management system and assaying and hallmarking to ensure their continuing suitability
and effectiveness, and to introduce necessary changes or improvements. The review may
also be done at any time depending of need of any situation that may arise as a result of audit
by BIS, customer complaints etc.
2.
The inputs to management review shall be recorded and shall include information
related to the following:

a) Changes in internal and external issues that are relevant to the centre;
b) Fulfillment of objectives;
c) Suitability of policies and procedures;
d) Status of actions from previous management reviews;
e) Outcome of recent internal audits;

f) Corrective actions;
g) Assessments by external bodies;
h) Changes in the volume and type of the work or in the range of centre activities;
j) Customer and personnel feedback;
k) Complaints;
m) Effectiveness of any implemented improvements;
n) Adequacy of resources;
o) Results of risk identification;
p) Outcomes of the assurance of the validity of results; and
q) Other relevant factors, such as monitoring activities and training.

3.
During the meeting CEO will explain the quality policy and overall objectives in order
to have in-depth clarity about customer requirements and as well as statutory and regulatory
requirements.
4.
The Quality Manager will be responsible to convene the management review meeting
and ensure that finding from management reviews and the actions that arise from them has
been appropriately recorded and those actions identified during the review are implemented
within the agreed timescale by the concerned persons.

ANNEXURE-I

LIST OF EQUIPMENT, CHEMICALS/REAGENTS FOR ASSAYING AND HALLMARKING

a) For Gold

Sl

No.

Name of Equipment and Instruments
 Least
 Count/Sensitivity

Range

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A-1
LIST OF EQUIPMENTS

i)
Cupellation furnace
―
up to 1150 °C

ii)
Annealing furnace
―
 up to 900 °C

iii)
Weighing balance (to be installed in dust free room
antivibration platform)

0.002 mg for 990
fineness and 0.001

mg for more than

990 fineness

iv)
Laser machine (capable of marking as per IS 1417)

v)
XRF machine (capable to detect Cd, Pb, Ir, Ru, Os
and other platinum group elements)

vi)
Air conditioner

vii)
Generator (for uninterrupted power supply to the
cupellation furnace

viii)
Balling plier

ix)
Cupels

x)
Cleaning brush

xi)
Hammer and anvil (hammer of 400 g) or power
press

xii)
Scrapping tools (different type of scrappers, micro
drills, chisels, etc

xiii)
Magnifying glass (10 X)

xiv)
Emery paper (different grades)

xv)
Aluminium and stainless steel tray

xvi)
Thermometer

110 °C

xvii)
Hydrometer

1.0 to 2.0 SG

xviii)
Parting tray with thimbles of Pt or Pt/Ir or Pt/Rh
or unglazed silica (The bottom surface of the base
of the parting tray shall not touch the base of the
parting container)

xix)
Crucible (pure graphite crucible for melting of
scrapings)

xx)
Hot plate

xxi)
Jeweller's roll

xxii)
Scarification dishes (dia 50 mm required for testing
of white gold)

xxiii)
Tongs and forceps

xxiv)
Anti-vibration table/platform for high accuracy
balance

xxv)
Numbering device/number punch

xxvi)
Fume-hood with scrubber

xxvii)
Furnace for melting scrapping

1050 °C

xxviii)
Micrometer
0.01 mm

xxix)
Reference gold sample of 585, 750,833, 916, 958
and 995 fineness for internal checks

A-2
 LIST OF REAGENTS

Borax, anhydrous

Pure Gold for Check (Proof) Samples
Lead Foil or Foil + Lead Bids
Pure Copper (foil/wire/disc), Silver, Nickel, Palladium
Parting Acid No. 1
Parting Acid No. 2
Distilled Water

b) For silver

Sl
 No.

Name of the Equipments and Instruments
Least Count/

Sensitivity

Range

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

B-1
LIST OF EQUIPMENTS

i)
XRF machine (capable to detect Cd and Pb)

ii)
Laser machine (capable of marking large article also)

iii)
Weighing balance (to be installed in dust free room and
anti- vibration platform)

0.01 mg

iv)
Air conditioner (to make the atmosphere dust free and to
maintain room temp)

v)
Hot plate (convenient size for silver assaying)

250 °C

vi)
Drying oven electrical

200 °C

vii)
Hammer

 1 kg

viii)
Rolling mill (capable of rolling buttons into strip)

ix)
Generator for uninterrupted power supply

x)
Scrapping tools (microdrill, different types of scrappers,
scissors and chisels)

xi)
Magnifying glass (10 X)

xii)
Burette/dropping pipette (see IS 2113)

xiii)
Metallic tray (for carrying skiff, see IS 2113)

xiv)
Watch glass

75 mm Dia

xv)
Funnel

xvi)
Glass beaker

25 mm Dia

250 ml
xvii)
Tongs and forceps

xviii)
Desiccator

xix)
Filter vacuum pump

xx)
Sintered glass crucible No.3 (medium porosity) G3 and
G4

xxi)
Anti-vibration table for high accuracy balance

xxii)
Distilled water/appropriate distillation plant for distilled
water

xxiii)
Glass rods

xxiv)
Wash bottle with fine jet

xxv)
Reference silver sample of 800, 850, 925, 970 and 990
fineness

B-2
 LIST OF REAGENTS

Concentrated Nitric Acid (Specific Gravity 1.42)
Concentrated Hydrochloric Acid (Specific Gravity 1.16)
Distilled Water
B-3
 LIST OF APPARATUS

i)
Automatic Titrator Machine (capable of delivering increment of 0.05 ml at the equivalence point)

ii)
Titration Beaker

ANNEXURE II

[ORGANIZATION STRUCTURE]

ANNEXURE III

COMPETENCE REQUIREMENTS

1.0
Purpose

The purpose is to define competence requirements of personnel for each function influencing
the results of centre's activities, including requirements for education, qualification, training,
technical knowledge, skills and experience.

2.0 Competence

The CEO shall assess each technical person, namely Assaying In-charge, Deputy Assaying Incharge, Sampler, XRF In-charge and approve their competence.

3.0
Education Qualification & Experience

The assay-in-charge shall be graduate in science or diploma/graduate in metallurgy with
chemistry as one of the subjects and shall have undergone training in lab management,
sampling, assaying and hallmarking.

The deputy of assay in charge shall be graduate in science/diploma in metallurgy with
knowledge of assaying or 12th standard pass with 2 yrs of experience in assaying centres to
carry out assaying.

4.0
Training

All personnel in various functional areas, particularly assay in-charge, deputy assay in-charge,
XRF in-charge, are adequately trained on job before they are inducted into actual working where
they are responsible for testing of samples. Adequacy of training is also assessed before
inducting to a new section at the centre whenever assigned /developed. On job training are also
imparted from time to time on need basis. The details of training are placed below:

4.1
Centre first selects the person and puts him/her on trial for few days. During this period
Assaying In-charge identifies the training needs based upon

(a) basic education
(b) knowledge
(c) current level of skill
(d) grasping power and
(e) overall personality, relevant to the present and anticipated tasks of the centre

4.2
A training program has been prepared and records are maintained;

4.3 Centre puts trainees under close supervision of senior staff member and periodically their

progress is reviewed by Assaying In-charge and further fresh inputs are given.
4.4
CEO evaluates effectiveness of the training actions taken.

5.0
PROCEDURE

i.
Centre shall assign the responsibility to Quality Manager and Assaying In-charge for providing
appropriate training to staff;
ii.
CEO selects the Assaying In-charge on the basis of the education, training, experience and

demonstrated skills, as required and maintains the record and supporting documents. He/She
undergoes training in lab management, Sampling, Assaying and Hallmarking.
iv.
CEO, Assaying In-charge and Quality Manager, who are responsible for giving opinions and
interpretations gathers, in addition to the appropriate qualifications, training, knowledge and
experience of assaying work, specifically the following:
a)
knowledge on technology used for manufacturing gold/silver articles, their testing or the
way they are used or intended to be used and of the defects or degradation which may
occur during or in service;
b)
knowledge of the general requirements expressed in the legislation and standards,
c)
understanding of the significance of deviation found with regard to the normal use of
gold articles.
5.1
The in-house/on-job training is imparted and evaluated in following manner (as applicable)

(i)
Study of the relevant standard/document by the trainee
(ii)
Demonstration of the testing by the identified trainer
(iii)
Testing by the trainee under supervision of trainer on remnant
(iv)
Written/Oral examination conducted by OIC/trainer
(v)
Testing of CRM/SRM and/or Re-testing of the samples by trainee independently which
has already been tested.

5.2
Record

The record of the training imparted shall be maintained and retained till the person is in the
centre by the Quality Manager.

6.0 Supervision of personnel

The Centre obtains a written undertaking from its managerial and other key personnel who are
exposed to customer's identity and other details, stating that they will never succumb to any type
of pressure or influence of customers or internal sources or external commercial, financial and
other pressures. In addition, the management keeps strict vigilance and watch over its personnel
to ensure that its personnel are free from any undue internal and external influences that
adversely affect the quality of their work. The assay results/ test reports are personally scrutinized
by CEO/Centre In charge/Quality Manager before they are released. CEO also monitors
personally the entire system on his own to prevent any leakage of information.

ANNEXURE IV
Procedure for Measurement Uncertainty evaluation

1. PURPOSE:

1.1 The purpose of this procedure is to evaluate measurement Uncertainty in Determination of

Gold in Gold Jewellery - Cupellation (Fire Assay) Method IS 1418

2. PROCEDURE:

2.1 Specifying measurand: A clear statement of what is being measured including the

relationship between the measurand and input quantities (e.g. measured quantities,
constants, calibration standard values etc.) on which it depends, is written down.
Corrections for known systematic effects are included, wherever possible.

2.2 Identification of Uncertainty sources: Possible sources of Uncertainty are listed, including

sources that contribute to the Uncertainty of the parameters in the relationship specified
in 4.1 but may include other sources and must include sources arising from assumptions.

2.3 Quantification of Uncertainty components: The size of Uncertainty component associated

with each potential source of Uncertainty identified is measured or estimated. It is often
possible to estimate or determine a single contribution to Uncertainty associated with a
number of separate sources. It is also considered whether available data accounts
sufficiently for all sources of Uncertainty and additional experiments and studies are
planned carefully in order to ensure that all the sources of Uncertainty are adequately
accounted for.

2.4 Before combining, all the Uncertainty contributions are expressed as standard

uncertainties, i.e. as Standard Deviations. This involves conversion from some other
measure of dispersion. The following rules are followed for converting an Uncertainty
component to a Standard Deviation.

2.5 TYPE A Evaluation of Standard Uncertainty by the Statistical Analysis of

series of observations.
(i)
Type A evaluation of Standard Uncertainty applies to situation when several
Independent observations have been made.

(ii)
Let us denote by X the repeatedly measured input quantity. With N statistically
independent observations (N>1), the estimate of X is x, the arithmetic mean :

The Uncertainty of Measurement associated with the estimate x is evaluated
according to one of the following methods:

(iii)
An estimate of the variance of the underlying probability distribution of x is the
experimental variance s2 (x) of values xi, given by:

(iv)
The positive square root of estimated variance is known as experimental standard
deviation and characterizes the dispersion of the observed values about the mean

s (xi) = √Variance

Type A Uncertainty is:

UA = s(xi)

√N

Type A Uncertainty has N-1 degree of Freedom.

2.6 TYPE B evaluation of Standard Uncertainty

The type B evaluation of Standard Uncertainty is the evaluation of the uncertainty
based on scientific judgment, all the relevant information available, which is other than
statistical analysis of a series of observation.

Values belonging to this category may be derived from:

✓ Previous calibration data
✓ Experience with or general knowledge of the behavior and properties of relevant

materials and instruments
✓ Manufacturer's specifications
✓ Data provided in calibration and other certificates

The proper use of the available information of standard uncertainty of measurement
calls for detailed understanding of the measurement process and associated factors which
may attribute to measurement uncertainties.

The component of type B standard uncertainty may follow any of the distribution viz.
Normal, Rectangular, Triangular, U-shaped etc. These uncertainty components are designated
as A1, A2, A3, etc.

If A1 follows normal distribution function then the standard uncertainty U1-A1/k, where k
is the limiting value (value corresponding to ∞ observations). If A2 follows rectangular probability
distribution function then U2=A2/√3. Similarly, for triangular probability distribution function
U3=A3/√6.

The Rectangular distribution is a reasonable default model in the absence of any other
information. But if it is known that values of the quantity in question near the centre of the
limits are more likely than values close to the limits, a triangular or a normal distribution may
be a better model.

Mathematical expression:

Uncertainty of the equipment used as specified in calibration certificate = A1(Normal Distribution)

Standard Uncertainty, U1 = A1/k
(Value of k to be taken from calibration

N
s2(x) = 1
∑ (xi-x) 2
N-1 i=1

=Variance

certificate)

Degree of freedom ν2 = ∞

2.7 Combined Uncertainty = Uc

Uc = √(Type A )2+(Type B)2

% Uc = Uc x 100
 x̄

2.8 Calculation of coverage factor 'k'

To estimate the value of a coverage factor 'k' corresponding to a specified coverage
probability requires that the reliability of the standard uncertainty u(y) of the output estimate
y is taken into account.

The procedure for calculating an appropriate coverage factor 'k':

Step 1: Obtain the standard uncertainty associated with the output estimate.

Step 2: Estimate the effective degree of freedom 'νeff' of the standard uncertainty u(y)

associated with the output estimate y from the Welch-Satterthwaite formula.

Welch-Satterthwaite formula is as follows:

=
( Uc )4

(UA)4 + (U1)4 + (U2)4 + (U3 )4+ (U4 )4+ (U5 )4+ (U6 )4+ ------- + (UN )4

ν1
ν2
ν3
ν4
ν5
ν6
ν7
νN

Step 3: Obtain the coverage factor k from the table of values of student 't' distribution.
If the value of νeff is not an integer, it is truncated to the next lower integer and the
corresponding coverage factor k is obtained from the table.

2.9 Expanded Uncertainty:

Expanded Uncertainty is obtained by multiplying the Standard Uncertainty u(y) of the output estimate
y by a coverage factor k.
U = ku(y)

νeff
=
( Uc )4

N
∑ Ui4(y)
i=1 νi

ANNEXURE V

LIST OF RECORDS

Sl.
No.
Record No.
Title

1.
Quality Plan

2.
Record of Licenses of Jewelers for whom Hallmarking done (List of Clients)

3.
Contract with Jeweller for Assaying & Hallmarking Services (Contract with Clients)

4.
List Measuring Instruments, Assaying Equipment and Devices with Schedule and
Record of Maintenance and Calibration

5.
Stock Reference Standard Materials and Their Purity Certificates (except check gold)

6.
Record of Check Gold Consumption and Purity Certificates (Issue, Use and Stock)

7.
Record of Daily Tests (XRF)

8.
Record of Assay (Silver)

9.
Record of Payments Received from Jewellers

10.
Intermediate Checks - Assay Balance

11.
Laboratory Consumable Materials, Including Cupels (Issue, consumption and stock)

12.
List of documents from external sources

13.
Annual Programme - Internal audit

14.
Yearly Schedule - Internal audit

15.
Observations & findings - Internal audit

16.
Nonconformance - Internal audit

17.
Schedule for Management Review Meeting [MRM]

18.
Minutes of Management Review Meeting [MRM]

19.
Schedules of Rates for Assaying & Hallmarking Services - BIS

20.
Preventive Maintenance Plan of Utility Equipment

21.
Purchase Indent

22.
Purchase Order

23.
Goods Receipt cum Inspection Record

24.
Stock Register

25.
Performance of Suppliers

26.
Performance of Service Providers

27.
Approved Suppliers & Service Providers

28.
Incoming Inspection Record - Laboratory consumables (Metals)

29.
Incoming Inspection Record - Laboratory consumables (Nitric Acid)

30.
Incoming Inspection Record - Laboratory Consumables (Distilled Water)

31.
Attendance Log

32.
Record of Training [Needs, Programme, Provided]

33.
List of Employees with Responsibility Matrix

34.
Appointment letters of Quality Manager & Assay In-charge

35.
Authorized specific personnel for particular type of work

36.
Authorized personnel for implementing Corrective actions

37.
Authorized signatories for authenticity and issue of Test Reports

38.
List of Internal auditors

39.
Competence of Key Personnel & Employees

40.
Record of participation in ILC/PT

41.
Record of calculation of Measurement Uncertainty

The above list is not exhaustive. Records to be added as per works done and need.

ANNEXURE VI
[SITE PLAN]
